
*
John Dryden

**
The Aeneid
***

Arms, and the man I sing, who, forc'd by fate,
And haughty Juno's unrelenting hate,
Expell'd and exil'd, left the Trojan shore.
Long labors, both by sea and land, he bore,
And in the doubtful war, before he won
The Latian realm, and built the destin'd town;
His banish'd gods restor'd to rites divine,
And settled sure succession in his line,
From whence the race of Alban fathers come,
And the long glories of majestic Rome.

O Muse! the causes and the crimes relate;
What goddess was provok'd, and whence her hate;
For what offense the Queen of Heav'n began
To persecute so brave, so just a man;
Involv'd his anxious life in endless cares,
Expos'd to wants, and hurried into wars!
Can heav'nly minds such high resentment show,
Or exercise their spite in human woe?

Against the Tiber's mouth, but far away,
An ancient town was seated on the sea;
A Tyrian colony; the people made
Stout for the war, and studious of their trade:
Carthage the name; belov'd by Juno more
Than her own Argos, or the Samian shore.
Here stood her chariot; here, if Heav'n were kind,
The seat of awful empire she design'd.
Yet she had heard an ancient rumor fly,
(Long cited by the people of the sky,)
That times to come should see the Trojan race
Her Carthage ruin, and her tow'rs deface;
Nor thus confin'd, the yoke of sov'reign sway
Should on the necks of all the nations lay.
She ponder'd this, and fear'd it was in fate;
Nor could forget the war she wag'd of late
For conqu'ring Greece against the Trojan state.
Besides, long causes working in her mind,
And secret seeds of envy, lay behind;
Deep graven in her heart the doom remain'd
Of partial Paris, and her form disdain'd;
The grace bestow'd on ravish'd Ganymed,
Electra's glories, and her injur'd bed.
Each was a cause alone; and all combin'd
To kindle vengeance in her haughty mind.
For this, far distant from the Latian coast
She drove the remnants of the Trojan host;
And sev'n long years th' unhappy wand'ring train
Were toss'd by storms, and scatter'd thro' the main.
Such time, such toil, requir'd the Roman name,
Such length of labor for so vast a frame.

Now scarce the Trojan fleet, with sails and oars,
Had left behind the fair Sicilian shores,
Ent'ring with cheerful shouts the wat'ry reign,
And plowing frothy furrows in the main;
When, lab'ring still with endless discontent,
The Queen of Heav'n did thus her fury vent:

"Then am I vanquish'd? must I yield?" said she,
"And must the Trojans reign in Italy?
So Fate will have it, and Jove adds his force;
Nor can my pow'r divert their happy course.
Could angry Pallas, with revengeful spleen,
The Grecian navy burn, and drown the men?
She, for the fault of one offending foe,
The bolts of Jove himself presum'd to throw:
With whirlwinds from beneath she toss'd the ship,
And bare expos'd the bosom of the deep;
Then, as an eagle gripes the trembling game,
The wretch, yet hissing with her father's flame,
She strongly seiz'd, and with a burning wound
Transfix'd, and naked, on a rock she bound.
But I, who walk in awful state above,
The majesty of heav'n, the sister wife of Jove,
For length of years my fruitless force employ
Against the thin remains of ruin'd Troy!
What nations now to Juno's pow'r will pray,
Or off'rings on my slighted altars lay?"

Thus rag'd the goddess; and, with fury fraught.
The restless regions of the storms she sought,
Where, in a spacious cave of living stone,
The tyrant Aeolus, from his airy throne,
With pow'r imperial curbs the struggling winds,
And sounding tempests in dark prisons binds.
This way and that th' impatient captives tend,
And, pressing for release, the mountains rend.
High in his hall th' undaunted monarch stands,
And shakes his scepter, and their rage commands;
Which did he not, their unresisted sway
Would sweep the world before them in their way;
Earth, air, and seas thro' empty space would roll,
And heav'n would fly before the driving soul.
In fear of this, the Father of the Gods
Confin'd their fury to those dark abodes,
And lock'd 'em safe within, oppress'd with mountain loads;
Impos'd a king, with arbitrary sway,
To loose their fetters, or their force allay.
To whom the suppliant queen her pray'rs address'd,
And thus the tenor of her suit express'd:

"O Aeolus! for to thee the King of Heav'n
The pow'r of tempests and of winds has giv'n;
Thy force alone their fury can restrain,
And smooth the waves, or swell the troubled main-
A race of wand'ring slaves, abhorr'd by me,
With prosp'rous passage cut the Tuscan sea;
To fruitful Italy their course they steer,
And for their vanquish'd gods design new temples there.
Raise all thy winds; with night involve the skies;
Sink or disperse my fatal enemies.
Twice sev'n, the charming daughters of the main,
Around my person wait, and bear my train:
Succeed my wish, and second my design;
The fairest, Deiopeia, shall be thine,
And make thee father of a happy line."

To this the god: "'T is yours, O queen, to will
The work which duty binds me to fulfil.
These airy kingdoms, and this wide command,
Are all the presents of your bounteous hand:
Yours is my sov'reign's grace; and, as your guest,
I sit with gods at their celestial feast;
Raise tempests at your pleasure, or subdue;
Dispose of empire, which I hold from you."

He said, and hurl'd against the mountain side
His quiv'ring spear, and all the god applied.
The raging winds rush thro' the hollow wound,
And dance aloft in air, and skim along the ground;
Then, settling on the sea, the surges sweep,
Raise liquid mountains, and disclose the deep.
South, East, and West with mix'd confusion roar,
And roll the foaming billows to the shore.
The cables crack; the sailors' fearful cries
Ascend; and sable night involves the skies;
And heav'n itself is ravish'd from their eyes.
Loud peals of thunder from the poles ensue;
Then flashing fires the transient light renew;
The face of things a frightful image bears,
And present death in various forms appears.
Struck with unusual fright, the Trojan chief,
With lifted hands and eyes, invokes relief;
And, "Thrice and four times happy those," he cried,
"That under Ilian walls before their parents died!
Tydides, bravest of the Grecian train!
Why could not I by that strong arm be slain,
And lie by noble Hector on the plain,
Or great Sarpedon, in those bloody fields
Where Simois rolls the bodies and the shields
Of heroes, whose dismember'd hands yet bear
The dart aloft, and clench the pointed spear!"

Thus while the pious prince his fate bewails,
Fierce Boreas drove against his flying sails,
And rent the sheets; the raging billows rise,
And mount the tossing vessels to the skies:
Nor can the shiv'ring oars sustain the blow;
The galley gives her side, and turns her prow;
While those astern, descending down the steep,
Thro' gaping waves behold the boiling deep.
Three ships were hurried by the southern blast,
And on the secret shelves with fury cast.
Those hidden rocks th' Ausonian sailors knew:
They call'd them Altars, when they rose in view,
And show'd their spacious backs above the flood.
Three more fierce Eurus, in his angry mood,
Dash'd on the shallows of the moving sand,
And in mid ocean left them moor'd aland.
Orontes' bark, that bore the Lycian crew,
(A horrid sight!) ev'n in the hero's view,
From stem to stern by waves was overborne:
The trembling pilot, from his rudder torn,
Was headlong hurl'd; thrice round the ship was toss'd,
Then bulg'd at once, and in the deep was lost;
And here and there above the waves were seen
Arms, pictures, precious goods, and floating men.
The stoutest vessel to the storm gave way,
And suck'd thro' loosen'd planks the rushing sea.
Ilioneus was her chief: Alethes old,
Achates faithful, Abas young and bold,
Endur'd not less; their ships, with gaping seams,
Admit the deluge of the briny streams.

Meantime imperial Neptune heard the sound
Of raging billows breaking on the ground.
Displeas'd, and fearing for his wat'ry reign,
He rear'd his awful head above the main,
Serene in majesty; then roll'd his eyes
Around the space of earth, and seas, and skies.
He saw the Trojan fleet dispers'd, distress'd,
By stormy winds and wintry heav'n oppress'd.
Full well the god his sister's envy knew,
And what her aims and what her arts pursue.
He summon'd Eurus and the western blast,
And first an angry glance on both he cast;
Then thus rebuk'd: "Audacious winds! from whence
This bold attempt, this rebel insolence?
Is it for you to ravage seas and land,
Unauthoriz'd by my supreme command?
To raise such mountains on the troubled main?
Whom I- but first 't is fit the billows to restrain;
And then you shall be taught obedience to my reign.
Hence! to your lord my royal mandate bear-
The realms of ocean and the fields of air
Are mine, not his. By fatal lot to me
The liquid empire fell, and trident of the sea.
His pow'r to hollow caverns is confin'd:
There let him reign, the jailer of the wind,
With hoarse commands his breathing subjects call,
And boast and bluster in his empty hall."
He spoke; and, while he spoke, he smooth'd the sea,
Dispell'd the darkness, and restor'd the day.
Cymothoe, Triton, and the sea-green train
Of beauteous nymphs, the daughters of the main,
Clear from the rocks the vessels with their hands:
The god himself with ready trident stands,
And opes the deep, and spreads the moving sands;
Then heaves them off the shoals. Where'er he guides
His finny coursers and in triumph rides,
The waves unruffle and the sea subsides.
As, when in tumults rise th' ignoble crowd,
Mad are their motions, and their tongues are loud;
And stones and brands in rattling volleys fly,
And all the rustic arms that fury can supply:
If then some grave and pious man appear,
They hush their noise, and lend a list'ning ear;
He soothes with sober words their angry mood,
And quenches their innate desire of blood:
So, when the Father of the Flood appears,
And o'er the seas his sov'reign trident rears,
Their fury falls: he skims the liquid plains,
High on his chariot, and, with loosen'd reins,
Majestic moves along, and awful peace maintains.
The weary Trojans ply their shatter'd oars
To nearest land, and make the Libyan shores.

Within a long recess there lies a bay:
An island shades it from the rolling sea,
And forms a port secure for ships to ride;
Broke by the jutting land, on either side,
In double streams the briny waters glide.
Betwixt two rows of rocks a sylvan scene
Appears above, and groves for ever green:
A grot is form'd beneath, with mossy seats,
To rest the Nereids, and exclude the heats.
Down thro' the crannies of the living walls
The crystal streams descend in murm'ring falls:
No haulsers need to bind the vessels here,
Nor bearded anchors; for no storms they fear.
Sev'n ships within this happy harbor meet,
The thin remainders of the scatter'd fleet.
The Trojans, worn with toils, and spent with woes,
Leap on the welcome land, and seek their wish'd repose.

First, good Achates, with repeated strokes
Of clashing flints, their hidden fire provokes:
Short flame succeeds; a bed of wither'd leaves
The dying sparkles in their fall receives:
Caught into life, in fiery fumes they rise,
And, fed with stronger food, invade the skies.
The Trojans, dropping wet, or stand around
The cheerful blaze, or lie along the ground:
Some dry their corn, infected with the brine,
Then grind with marbles, and prepare to dine.
Aeneas climbs the mountain's airy brow,
And takes a prospect of the seas below,
If Capys thence, or Antheus he could spy,
Or see the streamers of Caicus fly.
No vessels were in view; but, on the plain,
Three beamy stags command a lordly train
Of branching heads: the more ignoble throng
Attend their stately steps, and slowly graze along.
He stood; and, while secure they fed below,
He took the quiver and the trusty bow
Achates us'd to bear: the leaders first
He laid along, and then the vulgar pierc'd;
Nor ceas'd his arrows, till the shady plain
Sev'n mighty bodies with their blood distain.
For the sev'n ships he made an equal share,
And to the port return'd, triumphant from the war.
The jars of gen'rous wine (Acestes' gift,
When his Trinacrian shores the navy left)
He set abroach, and for the feast prepar'd,
In equal portions with the ven'son shar'd.
Thus while he dealt it round, the pious chief
With cheerful words allay'd the common grief:
"Endure, and conquer! Jove will soon dispose
To future good our past and present woes.
With me, the rocks of Scylla you have tried;
Th' inhuman Cyclops and his den defied.
What greater ills hereafter can you bear?
Resume your courage and dismiss your care,
An hour will come, with pleasure to relate
Your sorrows past, as benefits of Fate.
Thro' various hazards and events, we move
To Latium and the realms foredoom'd by Jove.
Call'd to the seat (the promise of the skies)
Where Trojan kingdoms once again may rise,
Endure the hardships of your present state;
Live, and reserve yourselves for better fate."

These words he spoke, but spoke not from his heart;
His outward smiles conceal'd his inward smart.
The jolly crew, unmindful of the past,
The quarry share, their plenteous dinner haste.
Some strip the skin; some portion out the spoil;
The limbs, yet trembling, in the caldrons boil;
Some on the fire the reeking entrails broil.
Stretch'd on the grassy turf, at ease they dine,
Restore their strength with meat, and cheer their souls with wine.
Their hunger thus appeas'd, their care attends
The doubtful fortune of their absent friends:
Alternate hopes and fears their minds possess,
Whether to deem 'em dead, or in distress.
Above the rest, Aeneas mourns the fate
Of brave Orontes, and th' uncertain state
Of Gyas, Lycus, and of Amycus.
The day, but not their sorrows, ended thus.

When, from aloft, almighty Jove surveys
Earth, air, and shores, and navigable seas,
At length on Libyan realms he fix'd his eyes-
Whom, pond'ring thus on human miseries,
When Venus saw, she with a lowly look,
Not free from tears, her heav'nly sire bespoke:

"O King of Gods and Men! whose awful hand
Disperses thunder on the seas and land,
Disposing all with absolute command;
How could my pious son thy pow'r incense?
Or what, alas! is vanish'd Troy's offense?
Our hope of Italy not only lost,
On various seas by various tempests toss'd,
But shut from ev'ry shore, and barr'd from ev'ry coast.
You promis'd once, a progeny divine
Of Romans, rising from the Trojan line,
In after times should hold the world in awe,
And to the land and ocean give the law.
How is your doom revers'd, which eas'd my care
When Troy was ruin'd in that cruel war?
Then fates to fates I could oppose; but now,
When Fortune still pursues her former blow,
What can I hope? What worse can still succeed?
What end of labors has your will decreed?
Antenor, from the midst of Grecian hosts,
Could pass secure, and pierce th' Illyrian coasts,
Where, rolling down the steep, Timavus raves
And thro' nine channels disembogues his waves.
At length he founded Padua's happy seat,
And gave his Trojans a secure retreat;
There fix'd their arms, and there renew'd their name,
And there in quiet rules, and crown'd with fame.
But we, descended from your sacred line,
Entitled to your heav'n and rites divine,
Are banish'd earth; and, for the wrath of one,
Remov'd from Latium and the promis'd throne.
Are these our scepters? these our due rewards?
And is it thus that Jove his plighted faith regards?"

To whom the Father of th' immortal race,
Smiling with that serene indulgent face,
With which he drives the clouds and clears the skies,
First gave a holy kiss; then thus replies:

"Daughter, dismiss thy fears; to thy desire
The fates of thine are fix'd, and stand entire.
Thou shalt behold thy wish'd Lavinian walls;
And, ripe for heav'n, when fate Aeneas calls,
Then shalt thou bear him up, sublime, to me:
No councils have revers'd my firm decree.
And, lest new fears disturb thy happy state,
Know, I have search'd the mystic rolls of Fate:
Thy son (nor is th' appointed season far)
In Italy shall wage successful war,
Shall tame fierce nations in the bloody field,
And sov'reign laws impose, and cities build,
Till, after ev'ry foe subdued, the sun
Thrice thro' the signs his annual race shall run:
This is his time prefix'd. Ascanius then,
Now call'd Iulus, shall begin his reign.
He thirty rolling years the crown shall wear,
Then from Lavinium shall the seat transfer,
And, with hard labor, Alba Longa build.
The throne with his succession shall be fill'd
Three hundred circuits more: then shall be seen
Ilia the fair, a priestess and a queen,
Who, full of Mars, in time, with kindly throes,
Shall at a birth two goodly boys disclose.
The royal babes a tawny wolf shall drain:
Then Romulus his grandsire's throne shall gain,
Of martial tow'rs the founder shall become,
The people Romans call, the city Rome.
To them no bounds of empire I assign,
Nor term of years to their immortal line.
Ev'n haughty Juno, who, with endless broils,
Earth, seas, and heav'n, and Jove himself turmoils;
At length aton'd, her friendly pow'r shall join,
To cherish and advance the Trojan line.
The subject world shall Rome's dominion own,
And, prostrate, shall adore the nation of the gown.
An age is ripening in revolving fate
When Troy shall overturn the Grecian state,
And sweet revenge her conqu'ring sons shall call,
To crush the people that conspir'd her fall.
Then Caesar from the Julian stock shall rise,
Whose empire ocean, and whose fame the skies
Alone shall bound; whom, fraught with eastern spoils,
Our heav'n, the just reward of human toils,
Securely shall repay with rites divine;
And incense shall ascend before his sacred shrine.
Then dire debate and impious war shall cease,
And the stern age be soften'd into peace:
Then banish'd Faith shall once again return,
And Vestal fires in hallow'd temples burn;
And Remus with Quirinus shall sustain
The righteous laws, and fraud and force restrain.
Janus himself before his fane shall wait,
And keep the dreadful issues of his gate,
With bolts and iron bars: within remains
Imprison'd Fury, bound in brazen chains;
High on a trophy rais'd, of useless arms,
He sits, and threats the world with vain alarms."

He said, and sent Cyllenius with command
To free the ports, and ope the Punic land
To Trojan guests; lest, ignorant of fate,
The queen might force them from her town and state.
Down from the steep of heav'n Cyllenius flies,
And cleaves with all his wings the yielding skies.
Soon on the Libyan shore descends the god,
Performs his message, and displays his rod:
The surly murmurs of the people cease;
And, as the fates requir'd, they give the peace:
The queen herself suspends the rigid laws,
The Trojans pities, and protects their cause.

Meantime, in shades of night Aeneas lies:
Care seiz'd his soul, and sleep forsook his eyes.
But, when the sun restor'd the cheerful day,
He rose, the coast and country to survey,
Anxious and eager to discover more.
It look'd a wild uncultivated shore;
But, whether humankind, or beasts alone
Possess'd the new-found region, was unknown.
Beneath a ledge of rocks his fleet he hides:
Tall trees surround the mountain's shady sides;
The bending brow above a safe retreat provides.
Arm'd with two pointed darts, he leaves his friends,
And true Achates on his steps attends.
Lo! in the deep recesses of the wood,
Before his eyes his goddess mother stood:
A huntress in her habit and her mien;
Her dress a maid, her air confess'd a queen.
Bare were her knees, and knots her garments bind;
Loose was her hair, and wanton'd in the wind;
Her hand sustain'd a bow; her quiver hung behind.
She seem'd a virgin of the Spartan blood:
With such array Harpalyce bestrode
Her Thracian courser and outstripp'd the rapid flood.
"Ho, strangers! have you lately seen," she said,
"One of my sisters, like myself array'd,
Who cross'd the lawn, or in the forest stray'd?
A painted quiver at her back she bore;
Varied with spots, a lynx's hide she wore;
And at full cry pursued the tusky boar."

Thus Venus: thus her son replied again:
"None of your sisters have we heard or seen,
O virgin! or what other name you bear
Above that style- O more than mortal fair!
Your voice and mien celestial birth betray!
If, as you seem, the sister of the day,
Or one at least of chaste Diana's train,
Let not an humble suppliant sue in vain;
But tell a stranger, long in tempests toss'd,
What earth we tread, and who commands the coast?
Then on your name shall wretched mortals call,
And offer'd victims at your altars fall."
"I dare not," she replied, "assume the name
Of goddess, or celestial honors claim:
For Tyrian virgins bows and quivers bear,
And purple buskins o'er their ankles wear.
Know, gentle youth, in Libyan lands you are-
A people rude in peace, and rough in war.
The rising city, which from far you see,
Is Carthage, and a Tyrian colony.
Phoenician Dido rules the growing state,
Who fled from Tyre, to shun her brother's hate.
Great were her wrongs, her story full of fate;
Which I will sum in short. Sichaeus, known
For wealth, and brother to the Punic throne,
Possess'd fair Dido's bed; and either heart
At once was wounded with an equal dart.
Her father gave her, yet a spotless maid;
Pygmalion then the Tyrian scepter sway'd:
One who condemn'd divine and human laws.
Then strife ensued, and cursed gold the cause.
The monarch, blinded with desire of wealth,
With steel invades his brother's life by stealth;
Before the sacred altar made him bleed,
And long from her conceal'd the cruel deed.
Some tale, some new pretense, he daily coin'd,
To soothe his sister, and delude her mind.
At length, in dead of night, the ghost appears
Of her unhappy lord: the specter stares,
And, with erected eyes, his bloody bosom bares.
The cruel altars and his fate he tells,
And the dire secret of his house reveals,
Then warns the widow, with her household gods,
To seek a refuge in remote abodes.
Last, to support her in so long a way,
He shows her where his hidden treasure lay.
Admonish'd thus, and seiz'd with mortal fright,
The queen provides companions of her flight:
They meet, and all combine to leave the state,
Who hate the tyrant, or who fear his hate.
They seize a fleet, which ready rigg'd they find;
Nor is Pygmalion's treasure left behind.
The vessels, heavy laden, put to sea
With prosp'rous winds; a woman leads the way.
I know not, if by stress of weather driv'n,
Or was their fatal course dispos'd by Heav'n;
At last they landed, where from far your eyes
May view the turrets of new Carthage rise;
There bought a space of ground, which (Byrsa call'd,
From the bull's hide) they first inclos'd, and wall'd.
But whence are you? what country claims your birth?
What seek you, strangers, on our Libyan earth?"

To whom, with sorrow streaming from his eyes,
And deeply sighing, thus her son replies:
"Could you with patience hear, or I relate,
O nymph, the tedious annals of our fate!
Thro' such a train of woes if I should run,
The day would sooner than the tale be done!
From ancient Troy, by force expell'd, we came-
If you by chance have heard the Trojan name.
On various seas by various tempests toss'd,
At length we landed on your Libyan coast.
The good Aeneas am I call'd- a name,
While Fortune favor'd, not unknown to fame.
My household gods, companions of my woes,
With pious care I rescued from our foes.
To fruitful Italy my course was bent;
And from the King of Heav'n is my descent.
With twice ten sail I cross'd the Phrygian sea;
Fate and my mother goddess led my way.
Scarce sev'n, the thin remainders of my fleet,
From storms preserv'd, within your harbor meet.
Myself distress'd, an exile, and unknown,
Debarr'd from Europe, and from Asia thrown,
In Libyan desarts wander thus alone."

His tender parent could no longer bear;
But, interposing, sought to soothe his care.
"Whoe'er you are- not unbelov'd by Heav'n,
Since on our friendly shore your ships are driv'n-
Have courage: to the gods permit the rest,
And to the queen expose your just request.
Now take this earnest of success, for more:
Your scatter'd fleet is join'd upon the shore;
The winds are chang'd, your friends from danger free;
Or I renounce my skill in augury.
Twelve swans behold in beauteous order move,
And stoop with closing pinions from above;
Whom late the bird of Jove had driv'n along,
And thro' the clouds pursued the scatt'ring throng:
Now, all united in a goodly team,
They skim the ground, and seek the quiet stream.
As they, with joy returning, clap their wings,
And ride the circuit of the skies in rings;
Not otherwise your ships, and ev'ry friend,
Already hold the port, or with swift sails descend.
No more advice is needful; but pursue
The path before you, and the town in view."

Thus having said, she turn'd, and made appear
Her neck refulgent, and dishevel'd hair,
Which, flowing from her shoulders, reach'd the ground.
And widely spread ambrosial scents around:
In length of train descends her sweeping gown;
And, by her graceful walk, the Queen of Love is known.
The prince pursued the parting deity
With words like these: "Ah! whither do you fly?
Unkind and cruel! to deceive your son
In borrow'd shapes, and his embrace to shun;
Never to bless my sight, but thus unknown;
And still to speak in accents not your own."
Against the goddess these complaints he made,
But took the path, and her commands obey'd.
They march, obscure; for Venus kindly shrouds
With mists their persons, and involves in clouds,
That, thus unseen, their passage none might stay,
Or force to tell the causes of their way.
This part perform'd, the goddess flies sublime
To visit Paphos and her native clime;
Where garlands, ever green and ever fair,
With vows are offer'd, and with solemn pray'r:
A hundred altars in her temple smoke;
A thousand bleeding hearts her pow'r invoke.

They climb the next ascent, and, looking down,
Now at a nearer distance view the town.
The prince with wonder sees the stately tow'rs,
Which late were huts and shepherds' homely bow'rs,
The gates and streets; and hears, from ev'ry part,
The noise and busy concourse of the mart.
The toiling Tyrians on each other call
To ply their labor: some extend the wall;
Some build the citadel; the brawny throng
Or dig, or push unwieldly stones along.
Some for their dwellings choose a spot of ground,
Which, first design'd, with ditches they surround.
Some laws ordain; and some attend the choice
Of holy senates, and elect by voice.
Here some design a mole, while others there
Lay deep foundations for a theater;
From marble quarries mighty columns hew,
For ornaments of scenes, and future view.
Such is their toil, and such their busy pains,
As exercise the bees in flow'ry plains,
When winter past, and summer scarce begun,
Invites them forth to labor in the sun;
Some lead their youth abroad, while some condense
Their liquid store, and some in cells dispense;
Some at the gate stand ready to receive
The golden burthen, and their friends relieve;
All with united force, combine to drive
The lazy drones from the laborious hive:
With envy stung, they view each other's deeds;
The fragrant work with diligence proceeds.
"Thrice happy you, whose walls already rise!"
Aeneas said, and view'd, with lifted eyes,
Their lofty tow'rs; then, entiring at the gate,
Conceal'd in clouds (prodigious to relate)
He mix'd, unmark'd, among the busy throng,
Borne by the tide, and pass'd unseen along.

Full in the center of the town there stood,
Thick set with trees, a venerable wood.
The Tyrians, landing near this holy ground,
And digging here, a prosp'rous omen found:
From under earth a courser's head they drew,
Their growth and future fortune to foreshew.
This fated sign their foundress Juno gave,
Of a soil fruitful, and a people brave.
Sidonian Dido here with solemn state
Did Juno's temple build, and consecrate,
Enrich'd with gifts, and with a golden shrine;
But more the goddess made the place divine.
On brazen steps the marble threshold rose,
And brazen plates the cedar beams inclose:
The rafters are with brazen cov'rings crown'd;
The lofty doors on brazen hinges sound.
What first Aeneas this place beheld,
Reviv'd his courage, and his fear expell'd.
For while, expecting there the queen, he rais'd
His wond'ring eyes, and round the temple gaz'd,
Admir'd the fortune of the rising town,
The striving artists, and their arts' renown;
He saw, in order painted on the wall,
Whatever did unhappy Troy befall:
The wars that fame around the world had blown,
All to the life, and ev'ry leader known.
There Agamemnon, Priam here, he spies,
And fierce Achilles, who both kings defies.
He stopp'd, and weeping said: "O friend! ev'n here
The monuments of Trojan woes appear!
Our known disasters fill ev'n foreign lands:
See there, where old unhappy Priam stands!
Ev'n the mute walls relate the warrior's fame,
And Trojan griefs the Tyrians' pity claim."
He said (his tears a ready passage find),
Devouring what he saw so well design'd,
And with an empty picture fed his mind:
For there he saw the fainting Grecians yield,
And here the trembling Trojans quit the field,
Pursued by fierce Achilles thro' the plain,
On his high chariot driving o'er the slain.
The tents of Rhesus next his grief renew,
By their white sails betray'd to nightly view;
And wakeful Diomede, whose cruel sword
The sentries slew, nor spar'd their slumb'ring lord,
Then took the fiery steeds, ere yet the food
Of Troy they taste, or drink the Xanthian flood.
Elsewhere he saw where Troilus defied
Achilles, and unequal combat tried;
Then, where the boy disarm'd, with loosen'd reins,
Was by his horses hurried o'er the plains,
Hung by the neck and hair, and dragg'd around:
The hostile spear, yet sticking in his wound,
With tracks of blood inscrib'd the dusty ground.
Meantime the Trojan dames, oppress'd with woe,
To Pallas' fane in long procession go,
In hopes to reconcile their heav'nly foe.
They weep, they beat their breasts, they rend their hair,
And rich embroider'd vests for presents bear;
But the stern goddess stands unmov'd with pray'r.
Thrice round the Trojan walls Achilles drew
The corpse of Hector, whom in fight he slew.
Here Priam sues; and there, for sums of gold,
The lifeless body of his son is sold.
So sad an object, and so well express'd,
Drew sighs and groans from the griev'd hero's breast,
To see the figure of his lifeless friend,
And his old sire his helpless hand extend.
Himself he saw amidst the Grecian train,
Mix'd in the bloody battle on the plain;
And swarthy Memnon in his arms he knew,
His pompous ensigns, and his Indian crew.
Penthisilea there, with haughty grace,
Leads to the wars an Amazonian race:
In their right hands a pointed dart they wield;
The left, for ward, sustains the lunar shield.
Athwart her breast a golden belt she throws,
Amidst the press alone provokes a thousand foes,
And dares her maiden arms to manly force oppose.

Thus while the Trojan prince employs his eyes,
Fix'd on the walls with wonder and surprise,
The beauteous Dido, with a num'rous train
And pomp of guards, ascends the sacred fane.
Such on Eurotas' banks, or Cynthus' height,
Diana seems; and so she charms the sight,
When in the dance the graceful goddess leads
The choir of nymphs, and overtops their heads:
Known by her quiver, and her lofty mien,
She walks majestic, and she looks their queen;
Latona sees her shine above the rest,
And feeds with secret joy her silent breast.
Such Dido was; with such becoming state,
Amidst the crowd, she walks serenely great.
Their labor to her future sway she speeds,
And passing with a gracious glance proceeds;
Then mounts the throne, high plac'd before the shrine:
In crowds around, the swarming people join.
She takes petitions, and dispenses laws,
Hears and determines ev'ry private cause;
Their tasks in equal portions she divides,
And, where unequal, there by lots decides.
Another way by chance Aeneas bends
His eyes, and unexpected sees his friends,
Antheus, Sergestus grave, Cloanthus strong,
And at their backs a mighty Trojan throng,
Whom late the tempest on the billows toss'd,
And widely scatter'd on another coast.
The prince, unseen, surpris'd with wonder stands,
And longs, with joyful haste, to join their hands;
But, doubtful of the wish'd event, he stays,
And from the hollow cloud his friends surveys,
Impatient till they told their present state,
And where they left their ships, and what their fate,
And why they came, and what was their request;
For these were sent, commission'd by the rest,
To sue for leave to land their sickly men,
And gain admission to the gracious queen.
Ent'ring, with cries they fill'd the holy fane;
Then thus, with lowly voice, Ilioneus began:

"O queen! indulg'd by favor of the gods
To found an empire in these new abodes,
To build a town, with statutes to restrain
The wild inhabitants beneath thy reign,
We wretched Trojans, toss'd on ev'ry shore,
From sea to sea, thy clemency implore.
Forbid the fires our shipping to deface!
Receive th' unhappy fugitives to grace,
And spare the remnant of a pious race!
We come not with design of wasteful prey,
To drive the country, force the swains away:
Nor such our strength, nor such is our desire;
The vanquish'd dare not to such thoughts aspire.
A land there is, Hesperia nam'd of old;
The soil is fruitful, and the men are bold-
Th' Oenotrians held it once- by common fame
Now call'd Italia, from the leader's name.
To that sweet region was our voyage bent,
When winds and ev'ry warring element
Disturb'd our course, and, far from sight of land,
Cast our torn vessels on the moving sand:
The sea came on; the South, with mighty roar,
Dispers'd and dash'd the rest upon the rocky shore.
Those few you see escap'd the Storm, and fear,
Unless you interpose, a shipwreck here.
What men, what monsters, what inhuman race,
What laws, what barb'rous customs of the place,
Shut up a desart shore to drowning men,
And drive us to the cruel seas again?
If our hard fortune no compassion draws,
Nor hospitable rights, nor human laws,
The gods are just, and will revenge our cause.
Aeneas was our prince: a juster lord,
Or nobler warrior, never drew a sword;
Observant of the right, religious of his word.
If yet he lives, and draws this vital air,
Nor we, his friends, of safety shall despair;
Nor you, great queen, these offices repent,
Which he will equal, and perhaps augment.
We want not cities, nor Sicilian coasts,
Where King Acestes Trojan lineage boasts.
Permit our ships a shelter on your shores,
Refitted from your woods with planks and oars,
That, if our prince be safe, we may renew
Our destin'd course, and Italy pursue.
But if, O best of men, the Fates ordain
That thou art swallow'd in the Libyan main,
And if our young Iulus be no more,
Dismiss our navy from your friendly shore,
That we to good Acestes may return,
And with our friends our common losses mourn."
Thus spoke Ilioneus: the Trojan crew
With cries and clamors his request renew.

The modest queen a while, with downcast eyes,
Ponder'd the speech; then briefly thus replies:
"Trojans, dismiss your fears; my cruel fate,
And doubts attending an unsettled state,
Force me to guard my coast from foreign foes.
Who has not heard the story of your woes,
The name and fortune of your native place,
The fame and valor of the Phrygian race?
We Tyrians are not so devoid of sense,
Nor so remote from Phoebus' influence.
Whether to Latian shores your course is bent,
Or, driv'n by tempests from your first intent,
You seek the good Acestes' government,
Your men shall be receiv'd, your fleet repair'd,
And sail, with ships of convoy for your guard:
Or, would you stay, and join your friendly pow'rs
To raise and to defend the Tyrian tow'rs,
My wealth, my city, and myself are yours.
And would to Heav'n, the Storm, you felt, would bring
On Carthaginian coasts your wand'ring king.
My people shall, by my command, explore
The ports and creeks of ev'ry winding shore,
And towns, and wilds, and shady woods, in quest
Of so renown'd and so desir'd a guest."

Rais'd in his mind the Trojan hero stood,
And long'd to break from out his ambient cloud:
Achates found it, and thus urg'd his way:
"From whence, O goddess-born, this long delay?
What more can you desire, your welcome sure,
Your fleet in safety, and your friends secure?
One only wants; and him we saw in vain
Oppose the Storm, and swallow'd in the main.
Orontes in his fate our forfeit paid;
The rest agrees with what your mother said."
Scarce had he spoken, when the cloud gave way,
The mists flew upward and dissolv'd in day.

The Trojan chief appear'd in open sight,
August in visage, and serenely bright.
His mother goddess, with her hands divine,
Had form'd his curling locks, and made his temples shine,
And giv'n his rolling eyes a sparkling grace,
And breath'd a youthful vigor on his face;
Like polish'd ivory, beauteous to behold,
Or Parian marble, when enchas'd in gold:
Thus radiant from the circling cloud he broke,
And thus with manly modesty he spoke:

"He whom you seek am I; by tempests toss'd,
And sav'd from shipwreck on your Libyan coast;
Presenting, gracious queen, before your throne,
A prince that owes his life to you alone.
Fair majesty, the refuge and redress
Of those whom fate pursues, and wants oppress,
You, who your pious offices employ
To save the relics of abandon'd Troy;
Receive the shipwreck'd on your friendly shore,
With hospitable rites relieve the poor;
Associate in your town a wand'ring train,
And strangers in your palace entertain:
What thanks can wretched fugitives return,
Who, scatter'd thro' the world, in exile mourn?
The gods, if gods to goodness are inclin'd;
If acts of mercy touch their heav'nly mind,
And, more than all the gods, your gen'rous heart.
Conscious of worth, requite its own desert!
In you this age is happy, and this earth,
And parents more than mortal gave you birth.
While rolling rivers into seas shall run,
And round the space of heav'n the radiant sun;
While trees the mountain tops with shades supply,
Your honor, name, and praise shall never die.
Whate'er abode my fortune has assign'd,
Your image shall be present in my mind."
Thus having said, he turn'd with pious haste,
And joyful his expecting friends embrac'd:
With his right hand Ilioneus was grac'd,
Serestus with his left; then to his breast
Cloanthus and the noble Gyas press'd;
And so by turns descended to the rest.

The Tyrian queen stood fix'd upon his face,
Pleas'd with his motions, ravish'd with his grace;
Admir'd his fortunes, more admir'd the man;
Then recollected stood, and thus began:
"What fate, O goddess-born; what angry pow'rs
Have cast you shipwrack'd on our barren shores?
Are you the great Aeneas, known to fame,
Who from celestial seed your lineage claim?

The same Aeneas whom fair Venus bore
To fam'd Anchises on th' Idaean shore?
It calls into my mind, tho' then a child,
When Teucer came, from Salamis exil'd,
And sought my father's aid, to be restor'd:
My father Belus then with fire and sword
Invaded Cyprus, made the region bare,
And, conqu'ring, finish'd the successful war.
From him the Trojan siege I understood,
The Grecian chiefs, and your illustrious blood.
Your foe himself the Dardan valor prais'd,
And his own ancestry from Trojans rais'd.
Enter, my noble guest, and you shall find,
If not a costly welcome, yet a kind:
For I myself, like you, have been distress'd,
Till Heav'n afforded me this place of rest;
Like you, an alien in a land unknown,
I learn to pity woes so like my own."
She said, and to the palace led her guest;
Then offer'd incense, and proclaim'd a feast.
Nor yet less careful for her absent friends,
Twice ten fat oxen to the ships she sends;
Besides a hundred boars, a hundred lambs,
With bleating cries, attend their milky dams;
And jars of gen'rous wine and spacious bowls
She gives, to cheer the sailors' drooping souls.
Now purple hangings clothe the palace walls,
And sumptuous feasts are made in splendid halls:
On Tyrian carpets, richly wrought, they dine;
With loads of massy plate the sideboards shine,
And antique vases, all of gold emboss'd
(The gold itself inferior to the cost),
Of curious work, where on the sides were seen
The fights and figures of illustrious men,
From their first founder to the present queen.

The good Aeneas, paternal care
Iulus' absence could no longer bear,
Dispatch'd Achates to the ships in haste,
To give a glad relation of the past,
And, fraught with precious gifts, to bring the boy,
Snatch'd from the ruins of unhappy Troy:
A robe of tissue, stiff with golden wire;
An upper vest, once Helen's rich attire,
From Argos by the fam'd adultress brought,
With golden flow'rs and winding foliage wrought,
Her mother Leda's present, when she came
To ruin Troy and set the world on flame;
The scepter Priam's eldest daughter bore,
Her orient necklace, and the crown she wore
Of double texture, glorious to behold,
One order set with gems, and one with gold.
Instructed thus, the wise Achates goes,
And in his diligence his duty shows.

But Venus, anxious for her son's affairs,
New counsels tries, and new designs prepares:
That Cupid should assume the shape and face
Of sweet Ascanius, and the sprightly grace;
Should bring the presents, in her nephew's stead,
And in Eliza's veins the gentle poison shed:
For much she fear'd the Tyrians, double-tongued,
And knew the town to Juno's care belong'd.
These thoughts by night her golden slumbers broke,
And thus alarm'd, to winged Love she spoke:
"My son, my strength, whose mighty pow'r alone
Controls the Thund'rer on his awful throne,
To thee thy much-afflicted mother flies,
And on thy succor and thy faith relies.
Thou know'st, my son, how Jove's revengeful wife,
By force and fraud, attempts thy brother's life;
And often hast thou mourn'd with me his pains.
Him Dido now with blandishment detains;
But I suspect the town where Juno reigns.
For this 't is needful to prevent her art,
And fire with love the proud Phoenician's heart:
A love so violent, so strong, so sure,
As neither age can change, nor art can cure.
How this may be perform'd, now take my mind:
Ascanius by his father is design'd
To come, with presents laden, from the port,
To gratify the queen, and gain the court.
I mean to plunge the boy in pleasing sleep,
And, ravish'd, in Idalian bow'rs to keep,
Or high Cythera, that the sweet deceit
May pass unseen, and none prevent the cheat.
Take thou his form and shape. I beg the grace
But only for a night's revolving space:
Thyself a boy, assume a boy's dissembled face;
That when, amidst the fervor of the feast,
The Tyrian hugs and fonds thee on her breast,
And with sweet kisses in her arms constrains,
Thou may'st infuse thy venom in her veins."
The God of Love obeys, and sets aside
His bow and quiver, and his plumy pride;
He walks Iulus in his mother's sight,
And in the sweet resemblance takes delight.

The goddess then to young Ascanius flies,
And in a pleasing slumber seals his eyes:
Lull'd in her lap, amidst a train of Loves,
She gently bears him to her blissful groves,
Then with a wreath of myrtle crowns his head,
And softly lays him on a flow'ry bed.
Cupid meantime assum'd his form and face,
Foll'wing Achates with a shorter pace,
And brought the gifts. The queen already sate
Amidst the Trojan lords, in shining state,
High on a golden bed: her princely guest
Was next her side; in order sate the rest.
Then canisters with bread are heap'd on high;
Th' attendants water for their hands supply,
And, having wash'd, with silken towels dry.
Next fifty handmaids in long order bore
The censers, and with fumes the gods adore:
Then youths, and virgins twice as many, join
To place the dishes, and to serve the wine.
The Tyrian train, admitted to the feast,
Approach, and on the painted couches rest.
All on the Trojan gifts with wonder gaze,
But view the beauteous boy with more amaze,
His rosy-color'd cheeks, his radiant eyes,
His motions, voice, and shape, and all the god's disguise;
Nor pass unprais'd the vest and veil divine,
Which wand'ring foliage and rich flow'rs entwine.
But, far above the rest, the royal dame,
(Already doom'd to love's disastrous flame,)
With eyes insatiate, and tumultuous joy,
Beholds the presents, and admires the boy.
The guileful god about the hero long,
With children's play, and false embraces, hung;
Then sought the queen: she took him to her arms
With greedy pleasure, and devour'd his charms.
Unhappy Dido little thought what guest,
How dire a god, she drew so near her breast;
But he, not mindless of his mother's pray'r,
Works in the pliant bosom of the fair,
And molds her heart anew, and blots her former care.
The dead is to the living love resign'd;
And all Aeneas enters in her mind.

Now, when the rage of hunger was appeas'd,
The meat remov'd, and ev'ry guest was pleas'd,
The golden bowls with sparkling wine are crown'd,
And thro' the palace cheerful cries resound.
From gilded roofs depending lamps display
Nocturnal beams, that emulate the day.
A golden bowl, that shone with gems divine,
The queen commanded to be crown'd with wine:
The bowl that Belus us'd, and all the Tyrian line.
Then, silence thro' the hall proclaim'd, she spoke:
"O hospitable Jove! we thus invoke,
With solemn rites, thy sacred name and pow'r;
Bless to both nations this auspicious hour!
So may the Trojan and the Tyrian line
In lasting concord from this day combine.
Thou, Bacchus, god of joys and friendly cheer,
And gracious Juno, both be present here!
And you, my lords of Tyre, your vows address
To Heav'n with mine, to ratify the peace."
The goblet then she took, with nectar crown'd
(Sprinkling the first libations on the ground,)
And rais'd it to her mouth with sober grace;
Then, sipping, offer'd to the next in place.
'T was Bitias whom she call'd, a thirsty soul;
He took challenge, and embrac'd the bowl,
With pleasure swill'd the gold, nor ceas'd to draw,
Till he the bottom of the brimmer saw.
The goblet goes around: Iopas brought
His golden lyre, and sung what ancient Atlas taught:
The various labors of the wand'ring moon,
And whence proceed th' eclipses of the sun;
Th' original of men and beasts; and whence
The rains arise, and fires their warmth dispense,
And fix'd and erring stars dispose their influence;
What shakes the solid earth; what cause delays
The summer nights and shortens winter days.
With peals of shouts the Tyrians praise the song:
Those peals are echo'd by the Trojan throng.
Th' unhappy queen with talk prolong'd the night,
And drank large draughts of love with vast delight;
Of Priam much enquir'd, of Hector more;
Then ask'd what arms the swarthy Memnon wore,
What troops he landed on the Trojan shore;
The steeds of Diomede varied the discourse,
And fierce Achilles, with his matchless force;
At length, as fate and her ill stars requir'd,
To hear the series of the war desir'd.
"Relate at large, my godlike guest," she said,
"The Grecian stratagems, the town betray'd:
The fatal issue of so long a war,
Your flight, your wand'rings, and your woes, declare;
For, since on ev'ry sea, on ev'ry coast,
Your men have been distress'd, your navy toss'd,
Sev'n times the sun has either tropic view'd,
The winter banish'd, and the spring renew'd."

All were attentive to the godlike man,
When from his lofty couch he thus began:
"Great queen, what you command me to relate
Renews the sad remembrance of our fate:
An empire from its old foundations rent,
And ev'ry woe the Trojans underwent;
A peopled city made a desart place;
All that I saw, and part of which I was:
Not ev'n the hardest of our foes could hear,
Nor stern Ulysses tell without a tear.
And now the latter watch of wasting night,
And setting stars, to kindly rest invite;
But, since you take such int'rest in our woe,
And Troy's disastrous end desire to know,
I will restrain my tears, and briefly tell
What in our last and fatal night befell.

"By destiny compell'd, and in despair,
The Greeks grew weary of the tedious war,
And by Minerva's aid a fabric rear'd,
Which like a steed of monstrous height appear'd:
The sides were plank'd with pine; they feign'd it made
For their return, and this the vow they paid.
Thus they pretend, but in the hollow side
Selected numbers of their soldiers hide:
With inward arms the dire machine they load,
And iron bowels stuff the dark abode.
In sight of Troy lies Tenedos, an isle
(While Fortune did on Priam's empire smile)
Renown'd for wealth; but, since, a faithless bay,
Where ships expos'd to wind and weather lay.
There was their fleet conceal'd. We thought, for Greece
Their sails were hoisted, and our fears release.
The Trojans, coop'd within their walls so long,
Unbar their gates, and issue in a throng,
Like swarming bees, and with delight survey
The camp deserted, where the Grecians lay:
The quarters of the sev'ral chiefs they show'd;
Here Phoenix, here Achilles, made abode;
Here join'd the battles; there the navy rode.
Part on the pile their wond'ring eyes employ:
The pile by Pallas rais'd to ruin Troy.
Thymoetes first ('t is doubtful whether hir'd,
Or so the Trojan destiny requir'd)
Mov'd that the ramparts might be broken down,
To lodge the monster fabric in the town.
But Capys, and the rest of sounder mind,
The fatal present to the flames designed,
Or to the wat'ry deep; at least to bore
The hollow sides, and hidden frauds explore.
The giddy vulgar, as their fancies guide,
With noise say nothing, and in parts divide.
Laocoon, follow'd by a num'rous crowd,
Ran from the fort, and cried, from far, aloud:
'O wretched countrymen! what fury reigns?
What more than madness has possess'd your brains?
Think you the Grecians from your coasts are gone?
And are Ulysses' arts no better known?
This hollow fabric either must inclose,
Within its blind recess, our secret foes;
Or 't is an engine rais'd above the town,
T' o'erlook the walls, and then to batter down.
Somewhat is sure design'd, by fraud or force:
Trust not their presents, nor admit the horse.'
Thus having said, against the steed he threw
His forceful spear, which, hissing as flew,
Pierc'd thro' the yielding planks of jointed wood,
And trembling in the hollow belly stood.
The sides, transpierc'd, return a rattling sound,
And groans of Greeks inclos'd come issuing thro' the wound
And, had not Heav'n the fall of Troy design'd,
Or had not men been fated to be blind,
Enough was said and done t'inspire a better mind.
Then had our lances pierc'd the treach'rous wood,
And Ilian tow'rs and Priam's empire stood.
Meantime, with shouts, the Trojan shepherds bring
A captive Greek, in bands, before the king;
Taken to take; who made himself their prey,
T' impose on their belief, and Troy betray;
Fix'd on his aim, and obstinately bent
To die undaunted, or to circumvent.
About the captive, tides of Trojans flow;
All press to see, and some insult the foe.
Now hear how well the Greeks their wiles disguis'd;
Behold a nation in a man compris'd.
Trembling the miscreant stood, unarm'd and bound;
He star'd, and roll'd his haggard eyes around,
Then said: 'Alas! what earth remains, what sea
Is open to receive unhappy me?
What fate a wretched fugitive attends,
Scorn'd by my foes, abandon'd by my friends?'
He said, and sigh'd, and cast a rueful eye:
Our pity kindles, and our passions die.
We cheer youth to make his own defense,
And freely tell us what he was, and whence:
What news he could impart, we long to know,
And what to credit from a captive foe.

"His fear at length dismiss'd, he said: 'Whate'er
My fate ordains, my words shall be sincere:
I neither can nor dare my birth disclaim;
Greece is my country, Sinon is my name.
Tho' plung'd by Fortune's pow'r in misery,
'T is not in Fortune's pow'r to make me lie.
If any chance has hither brought the name
Of Palamedes, not unknown to fame,
Who suffer'd from the malice of the times,
Accus'd and sentenc'd for pretended crimes,
Because these fatal wars he would prevent;
Whose death the wretched Greeks too late lament-
Me, then a boy, my father, poor and bare
Of other means, committed to his care,
His kinsman and companion in the war.
While Fortune favor'd, while his arms support
The cause, and rul'd the counsels, of the court,
I made some figure there; nor was my name
Obscure, nor I without my share of fame.
But when Ulysses, with fallacious arts,
Had made impression in the people's hearts,
And forg'd a treason in my patron's name
(I speak of things too far divulg'd by fame),
My kinsman fell. Then I, without support,
In private mourn'd his loss, and left the court.
Mad as I was, I could not bear his fate
With silent grief, but loudly blam'd the state,
And curs'd the direful author of my woes.
'T was told again; and hence my ruin rose.
I threaten'd, if indulgent Heav'n once more
Would land me safely on my native shore,
His death with double vengeance to restore.
This mov'd the murderer's hate; and soon ensued
Th' effects of malice from a man so proud.
Ambiguous rumors thro' the camp he spread,
And sought, by treason, my devoted head;
New crimes invented; left unturn'd no stone,
To make my guilt appear, and hide his own;
Till Calchas was by force and threat'ning wrought-
But why- why dwell I on that anxious thought?
If on my nation just revenge you seek,
And 't is t' appear a foe, t' appear a Greek;
Already you my name and country know;
Assuage your thirst of blood, and strike the blow:
My death will both the kingly brothers please,
And set insatiate Ithacus at ease.'
This fair unfinish'd tale, these broken starts,
Rais'd expectations in our longing hearts:
Unknowing as we were in Grecian arts.
His former trembling once again renew'd,
With acted fear, the villain thus pursued:

"'Long had the Grecians (tir'd with fruitless care,
And wearied with an unsuccessful war)
Resolv'd to raise the siege, and leave the town;
And, had the gods permitted, they had gone;
But oft the wintry seas and southern winds
Withstood their passage home, and chang'd their minds.
Portents and prodigies their souls amaz'd;
But most, when this stupendous pile was rais'd:
Then flaming meteors, hung in air, were seen,
And thunders rattled thro' a sky serene.
Dismay'd, and fearful of some dire event,
Eurypylus t' enquire their fate was sent.
He from the gods this dreadful answer brought:

"O Grecians, when the Trojan shores you sought,
Your passage with a virgin's blood was bought:
So must your safe return be bought again,
And Grecian blood once more atone the main."
The spreading rumor round the people ran;
All fear'd, and each believ'd himself the man.
Ulysses took th' advantage of their fright;
Call'd Calchas, and produc'd in open sight:
Then bade him name the wretch, ordain'd by fate
The public victim, to redeem the state.
Already some presag'd the dire event,
And saw what sacrifice Ulysses meant.
For twice five days the good old seer withstood
Th' intended treason, and was dumb to blood,
Till, tir'd, with endless clamors and pursuit
Of Ithacus, he stood no longer mute;
But, as it was agreed, pronounc'd that I
Was destin'd by the wrathful gods to die.
All prais'd the sentence, pleas'd the storm should fall
On one alone, whose fury threaten'd all.
The dismal day was come; the priests prepare
Their leaven'd cakes, and fillets for my hair.
I follow'd nature's laws, and must avow
I broke my bonds and fled the fatal blow.
Hid in a weedy lake all night I lay,
Secure of safety when they sail'd away.
But now what further hopes for me remain,
To see my friends, or native soil, again;
My tender infants, or my careful sire,
Whom they returning will to death require;
Will perpetrate on them their first design,
And take the forfeit of their heads for mine?
Which, O! if pity mortal minds can move,
If there be faith below, or gods above,
If innocence and truth can claim desert,
Ye Trojans, from an injur'd wretch avert.'

"False tears true pity move; the king commands
To loose his fetters, and unbind his hands:
Then adds these friendly words: 'Dismiss thy fears;
Forget the Greeks; be mine as thou wert theirs.
But truly tell, was it for force or guile,
Or some religious end, you rais'd the pile?'
Thus said the king. He, full of fraudful arts,
This well-invented tale for truth imparts:
'Ye lamps of heav'n!' he said, and lifted high
His hands now free, 'thou venerable sky!
Inviolable pow'rs, ador'd with dread!
Ye fatal fillets, that once bound this head!
Ye sacred altars, from whose flames I fled!
Be all of you adjur'd; and grant I may,
Without a crime, th' ungrateful Greeks betray,
Reveal the secrets of the guilty state,
And justly punish whom I justly hate!
But you, O king, preserve the faith you gave,
If I, to save myself, your empire save.
The Grecian hopes, and all th' attempts they made,
Were only founded on Minerva's aid.
But from the time when impious Diomede,
And false Ulysses, that inventive head,
Her fatal image from the temple drew,
The sleeping guardians of the castle slew,
Her virgin statue with their bloody hands
Polluted, and profan'd her holy bands;
From thence the tide of fortune left their shore,
And ebb'd much faster than it flow'd before:
Their courage languish'd, as their hopes decay'd;
And Pallas, now averse, refus'd her aid.
Nor did the goddess doubtfully declare
Her alter'd mind and alienated care.
When first her fatal image touch'd the ground,
She sternly cast her glaring eyes around,
That sparkled as they roll'd, and seem'd to threat:
Her heav'nly limbs distill'd a briny sweat.
Thrice from the ground she leap'd, was seen to wield
Her brandish'd lance, and shake her horrid shield.
Then Calchas bade our host for flight
And hope no conquest from the tedious war,
Till first they sail'd for Greece; with pray'rs besought
Her injur'd pow'r, and better omens brought.
And now their navy plows the wat'ry main,
Yet soon expect it on your shores again,
With Pallas pleas'd; as Calchas did ordain.
But first, to reconcile the blue-ey'd maid
For her stol'n statue and her tow'r betray'd,
Warn'd by the seer, to her offended name
We rais'd and dedicate this wondrous frame,
So lofty, lest thro' your forbidden gates
It pass, and intercept our better fates:
For, once admitted there, our hopes are lost;
And Troy may then a new Palladium boast;
For so religion and the gods ordain,
That, if you violate with hands profane
Minerva's gift, your town in flames shall burn,
(Which omen, O ye gods, on Graecia turn!)
But if it climb, with your assisting hands,
The Trojan walls, and in the city stands;
Then Troy shall Argos and Mycenae burn,
And the reverse of fate on us return.'

"With such deceits he gain'd their easy hearts,
Too prone to credit his perfidious arts.
What Diomede, nor Thetis' greater son,
A thousand ships, nor ten years' siege, had done-
False tears and fawning words the city won.

"A greater omen, and of worse portent,
Did our unwary minds with fear torment,
Concurring to produce the dire event.
Laocoon, Neptune's priest by lot that year,
With solemn pomp then sacrific'd a steer;
When, dreadful to behold, from sea we spied
Two serpents, rank'd abreast, the seas divide,
And smoothly sweep along the swelling tide.
Their flaming crests above the waves they show;
Their bellies seem to burn the seas below;
Their speckled tails advance to steer their course,
And on the sounding shore the flying billows force.
And now the strand, and now the plain they held;
Their ardent eyes with bloody streaks were fill'd;
Their nimble tongues they brandish'd as they came,
And lick'd their hissing jaws, that sputter'd flame.
We fled amaz'd; their destin'd way they take,
And to Laocoon and his children make;
And first around the tender boys they wind,
Then with their sharpen'd fangs their limbs and bodies grind.
The wretched father, running to their aid
With pious haste, but vain, they next invade;
Twice round his waist their winding volumes roll'd;
And twice about his gasping throat they fold.
The priest thus doubly chok'd, their crests divide,
And tow'ring o'er his head in triumph ride.
With both his hands he labors at the knots;
His holy fillets the blue venom blots;
His roaring fills the flitting air around.
Thus, when an ox receives a glancing wound,
He breaks his bands, the fatal altar flies,
And with loud bellowings breaks the yielding skies.
Their tasks perform'd, the serpents quit their prey,
And to the tow'r of Pallas make their way:
Couch'd at her feet, they lie protected there
By her large buckler and protended spear.
Amazement seizes all; the gen'ral cry
Proclaims Laocoon justly doom'd to die,
Whose hand the will of Pallas had withstood,
And dared to violate the sacred wood.
All vote t' admit the steed, that vows be paid
And incense offer'd to th' offended maid.
A spacious breach is made; the town lies bare;
Some hoisting-levers, some the wheels prepare
And fasten to the horse's feet; the rest
With cables haul along th' unwieldly beast.
Each on his fellow for assistance calls;
At length the fatal fabric mounts the walls,
Big with destruction. Boys with chaplets crown'd,
And choirs of virgins, sing and dance around.
Thus rais'd aloft, and then descending down,
It enters o'er our heads, and threats the town.
O sacred city, built by hands divine!
O valiant heroes of the Trojan line!
Four times he struck: as oft the clashing sound
Of arms was heard, and inward groans rebound.
Yet, mad with zeal, and blinded with our fate,
We haul along the horse in solemn state;
Then place the dire portent within the tow'r.
Cassandra cried, and curs'd th' unhappy hour;
Foretold our fate; but, by the god's decree,
All heard, and none believ'd the prophecy.
With branches we the fanes adorn, and waste,
In jollity, the day ordain'd to be the last.
Meantime the rapid heav'ns roll'd down the light,
And on the shaded ocean rush'd the night;
Our men, secure, nor guards nor sentries held,
But easy sleep their weary limbs compell'd.
The Grecians had embark'd their naval pow'rs
From Tenedos, and sought our well-known shores,
Safe under covert of the silent night,
And guided by th' imperial galley's light;
When Sinon, favor'd by the partial gods,
Unlock'd the horse, and op'd his dark abodes;
Restor'd to vital air our hidden foes,
Who joyful from their long confinement rose.
Tysander bold, and Sthenelus their guide,
And dire Ulysses down the cable slide:
Then Thoas, Athamas, and Pyrrhus haste;
Nor was the Podalirian hero last,
Nor injur'd Menelaus, nor the fam'd
Epeus, who the fatal engine fram'd.
A nameless crowd succeed; their forces join
T' invade the town, oppress'd with sleep and wine.
Those few they find awake first meet their fate;
Then to their fellows they unbar the gate.

"'T was in the dead of night, when sleep repairs
Our bodies worn with toils, our minds with cares,
When Hector's ghost before my sight appears:
A bloody shroud he seem'd, and bath'd in tears;
Such as he was, when, by Pelides slain,
Thessalian coursers dragg'd him o'er the plain.
Swoln were his feet, as when the thongs were thrust
Thro' the bor'd holes; his body black with dust;
Unlike that Hector who return'd from toils
Of war, triumphant, in Aeacian spoils,
Or him who made the fainting Greeks retire,
And launch'd against their navy Phrygian fire.
His hair and beard stood stiffen'd with his gore;
And all the wounds he for his country bore
Now stream'd afresh, and with new purple ran.
I wept to see the visionary man,
And, while my trance continued, thus began:
'O light of Trojans, and support of Troy,
Thy father's champion, and thy country's joy!
O, long expected by thy friends! from whence
Art thou so late return'd for our defense?
Do we behold thee, wearied as we are
With length of labors, and with toils of war?
After so many fun'rals of thy own
Art thou restor'd to thy declining town?
But say, what wounds are these? What new disgrace
Deforms the manly features of thy face?'

"To this the specter no reply did frame,
But answer'd to the cause for which he came,
And, groaning from the bottom of his breast,
This warning in these mournful words express'd:
'O goddess-born! escape, by timely flight,
The flames and horrors of this fatal night.
The foes already have possess'd the wall;
Troy nods from high, and totters to her fall.
Enough is paid to Priam's royal name,
More than enough to duty and to fame.
If by a mortal hand my father's throne
Could be defended, 't was by mine alone.
Now Troy to thee commends her future state,
And gives her gods companions of thy fate:
From their assistance walls expect,
Which, wand'ring long, at last thou shalt erect.'
He said, and brought me, from their blest abodes,
The venerable statues of the gods,
With ancient Vesta from the sacred choir,
The wreaths and relics of th' immortal fire.

"Now peals of shouts come thund'ring from afar,
Cries, threats, and loud laments, and mingled war:
The noise approaches, tho' our palace stood
Aloof from streets, encompass'd with a wood.
Louder, and yet more loud, I hear th' alarms
Of human cries distinct, and clashing arms.
Fear broke my slumbers; I no longer stay,
But mount the terrace, thence the town survey,
And hearken what the frightful sounds convey.
Thus, when a flood of fire by wind is borne,
Crackling it rolls, and mows the standing corn;
Or deluges, descending on the plains,
Sweep o'er the yellow year, destroy the pains
Of lab'ring oxen and the peasant's gains;
Unroot the forest oaks, and bear away
Flocks, folds, and trees, and undistinguish'd prey:
The shepherd climbs the cliff, and sees from far
The wasteful ravage of the wat'ry war.
Then Hector's faith was manifestly clear'd,
And Grecian frauds in open light appear'd.
The palace of Deiphobus ascends
In smoky flames, and catches on his friends.
Ucalegon burns next: the seas are bright
With splendor not their own, and shine with Trojan light.
New clamors and new clangors now arise,
The sound of trumpets mix'd with fighting cries.
With frenzy seiz'd, I run to meet th' alarms,
Resolv'd on death, resolv'd to die in arms,
But first to gather friends, with them t' oppose
(If fortune favor'd) and repel the foes;
Spurr'd by my courage, by my country fir'd,
With sense of honor and revenge inspir'd.

"Pantheus, Apollo's priest, a sacred name,
Had scap'd the Grecian swords, and pass'd the flame:
With relics loaden. to my doors he fled,
And by the hand his tender grandson led.
'What hope, O Pantheus? whither can we run?
Where make a stand? and what may yet be done?'
Scarce had I said, when Pantheus, with a groan:
'Troy is no more, and Ilium was a town!
The fatal day, th' appointed hour, is come,
When wrathful Jove's irrevocable doom
Transfers the Trojan state to Grecian hands.
The fire consumes the town, the foe commands;
And armed hosts, an unexpected force,
Break from the bowels of the fatal horse.
Within the gates, proud Sinon throws about
The flames; and foes for entrance press without,
With thousand others, whom I fear to name,
More than from Argos or Mycenae came.
To sev'ral posts their parties they divide;
Some block the narrow streets, some scour the wide:
The bold they kill, th' unwary they surprise;
Who fights finds death, and death finds him who flies.
The warders of the gate but scarce maintain
Th' unequal combat, and resist in vain.'

"I heard; and Heav'n, that well-born souls inspires,
Prompts me thro' lifted swords and rising fires
To run where clashing arms and clamor calls,
And rush undaunted to defend the walls.
Ripheus and Iph'itus by my side engage,
For valor one renown'd, and one for age.
Dymas and Hypanis by moonlight knew
My motions and my mien, and to my party drew;
With young Coroebus, who by love was led
To win renown and fair Cassandra's bed,
And lately brought his troops to Priam's aid,
Forewarn'd in vain by the prophetic maid.
Whom when I saw resolv'd in arms to fall,
And that one spirit animated all:
'Brave souls!' said I,- 'but brave, alas! in vain-
Come, finish what our cruel fates ordain.
You see the desp'rate state of our affairs,
And heav'n's protecting pow'rs are deaf to pray'rs.
The passive gods behold the Greeks defile
Their temples, and abandon to the spoil
Their own abodes: we, feeble few, conspire
To save a sinking town, involv'd in fire.
Then let us fall, but fall amidst our foes:
Despair of life the means of living shows.'
So bold a speech incourag'd their desire
Of death, and added fuel to their fire.

"As hungry wolves, with raging appetite,
Scour thro' the fields, nor fear the stormy night-
Their whelps at home expect the promis'd food,
And long to temper their dry chaps in blood-
So rush'd we forth at once; resolv'd to die,
Resolv'd, in death, the last extremes to try.
We leave the narrow lanes behind, and dare
Th' unequal combat in the public square:
Night was our friend; our leader was despair.
What tongue can tell the slaughter of that night?
What eyes can weep the sorrows and affright?
An ancient and imperial city falls:
The streets are fill'd with frequent funerals;
Houses and holy temples float in blood,
And hostile nations make a common flood.
Not only Trojans fall; but, in their turn,
The vanquish'd triumph, and the victors mourn.
Ours take new courage from despair and night:
Confus'd the fortune is, confus'd the fight.
All parts resound with tumults, plaints, and fears;
And grisly Death in sundry shapes appears.
Androgeos fell among us, with his band,
Who thought us Grecians newly come to land.
'From whence,' said he, 'my friends, this long delay?
You loiter, while the spoils are borne away:
Our ships are laden with the Trojan store;
And you, like truants, come too late ashore.'
He said, but soon corrected his mistake,
Found, by the doubtful answers which we make:
Amaz'd, he would have shunn'd th' unequal fight;
But we, more num'rous, intercept his flight.
As when some peasant, in a bushy brake,
Has with unwary footing press'd a snake;
He starts aside, astonish'd, when he spies
His rising crest, blue neck, and rolling eyes;
So from our arms surpris'd Androgeos flies.
In vain; for him and his we compass'd round,
Possess'd with fear, unknowing of the ground,
And of their lives an easy conquest found.
Thus Fortune on our first endeavor smil'd.
Coroebus then, with youthful hopes beguil'd,
Swoln with success, and a daring mind,
This new invention fatally design'd.
'My friends,' said he, 'since Fortune shows the way,
'T is fit we should th' auspicious guide obey.
For what has she these Grecian arms bestow'd,
But their destruction, and the Trojans' good?
Then change we shields, and their devices bear:
Let fraud supply the want of force in war.
They find us arms.' This said, himself he dress'd
In dead Androgeos' spoils, his upper vest,
His painted buckler, and his plumy crest.
Thus Ripheus, Dymas, all the Trojan train,
Lay down their own attire, and strip the slain.
Mix'd with the Greeks, we go with ill presage,
Flatter'd with hopes to glut our greedy rage;
Unknown, assaulting whom we blindly meet,
And strew with Grecian carcasses the street.
Thus while their straggling parties we defeat,
Some to the shore and safer ships retreat;
And some, oppress'd with more ignoble fear,
Remount the hollow horse, and pant in secret there.

"But, ah! what use of valor can be made,
When heav'n's propitious pow'rs refuse their aid!
Behold the royal prophetess, the fair
Cassandra, dragg'd by her dishevel'd hair,
Whom not Minerva's shrine, nor sacred bands,
In safety could protect from sacrilegious hands:
On heav'n she cast her eyes, she sigh'd, she cried-
'T was all she could- her tender arms were tied.
So sad a sight Coroebus could not bear;
But, fir'd with rage, distracted with despair,
Amid the barb'rous ravishers he flew:
Our leader's rash example we pursue.
But storms of stones, from the proud temple's height,
Pour down, and on our batter'd helms alight:
We from our friends receiv'd this fatal blow,
Who thought us Grecians, as we seem'd in show.
They aim at the mistaken crests, from high;
And ours beneath the pond'rous ruin lie.
Then, mov'd with anger and disdain, to see
Their troops dispers'd, the royal virgin free,
The Grecians rally, and their pow'rs unite,
With fury charge us, and renew the fight.
The brother kings with Ajax join their force,
And the whole squadron of Thessalian horse.

"Thus, when the rival winds their quarrel try,
Contending for the kingdom of the sky,
South, east, and west, on airy coursers borne;
The whirlwind gathers, and the woods are torn:
Then Nereus strikes the deep; the billows rise,
And, mix'd with ooze and sand, pollute the skies.
The troops we squander'd first again appear
From several quarters, and enclose the rear.
They first observe, and to the rest betray,
Our diff'rent speech; our borrow'd arms survey.
Oppress'd with odds, we fall; Coroebus first,
At Pallas' altar, by Peneleus pierc'd.
Then Ripheus follow'd, in th' unequal fight;
Just of his word, observant of the right:
Heav'n thought not so. Dymas their fate attends,
With Hypanis, mistaken by their friends.
Nor, Pantheus, thee, thy miter, nor the bands
Of awful Phoebus, sav'd from impious hands.
Ye Trojan flames, your testimony bear,
What I perform'd, and what I suffer'd there;
No sword avoiding in the fatal strife,
Expos'd to death, and prodigal of life;
Witness, ye heavens! I live not by my fault:
I strove to have deserv'd the death I sought.
But, when I could not fight, and would have died,
Borne off to distance by the growing tide,
Old Iphitus and I were hurried thence,
With Pelias wounded, and without defense.
New clamors from th' invested palace ring:
We run to die, or disengage the king.
So hot th' assault, so high the tumult rose,
While ours defend, and while the Greeks oppose
As all the Dardan and Argolic race
Had been contracted in that narrow space;
Or as all Ilium else were void of fear,
And tumult, war, and slaughter, only there.
Their targets in a tortoise cast, the foes,
Secure advancing, to the turrets rose:
Some mount the scaling ladders; some, more bold,
Swerve upwards, and by posts and pillars hold;
Their left hand gripes their bucklers in th' ascent,
While with their right they seize the battlement.
From their demolish'd tow'rs the Trojans throw
Huge heaps of stones, that, falling, crush the foe;
And heavy beams and rafters from the sides
(Such arms their last necessity provides)
And gilded roofs, come tumbling from on high,
The marks of state and ancient royalty.
The guards below, fix'd in the pass, attend
The charge undaunted, and the gate defend.
Renew'd in courage with recover'd breath,
A second time we ran to tempt our death,
To clear the palace from the foe, succeed
The weary living, and revenge the dead.

"A postern door, yet unobserv'd and free,
Join'd by the length of a blind gallery,
To the king's closet led: a way well known
To Hector's wife, while Priam held the throne,
Thro' which she brought Astyanax, unseen,
To cheer his grandsire and his grandsire's queen.
Thro' this we pass, and mount the tow'r, from whence
With unavailing arms the Trojans make defense.
From this the trembling king had oft descried
The Grecian camp, and saw their navy ride.
Beams from its lofty height with swords we hew,
Then, wrenching with our hands, th' assault renew;
And, where the rafters on the columns meet,
We push them headlong with our arms and feet.
The lightning flies not swifter than the fall,
Nor thunder louder than the ruin'd wall:
Down goes the top at once; the Greeks beneath
Are piecemeal torn, or pounded into death.
Yet more succeed, and more to death are sent;
We cease not from above, nor they below relent.
Before the gate stood Pyrrhus, threat'ning loud,
With glitt'ring arms conspicuous in the crowd.
So shines, renew'd in youth, the crested snake,
Who slept the winter in a thorny brake,
And, casting off his slough when spring returns,
Now looks aloft, and with new glory burns;
Restor'd with poisonous herbs, his ardent sides
Reflect the sun; and rais'd on spires he rides;
High o'er the grass, hissing he rolls along,
And brandishes by fits his forky tongue.
Proud Periphas, and fierce Automedon,
His father's charioteer, together run
To force the gate; the Scyrian infantry
Rush on in crowds, and the barr'd passage free.
Ent'ring the court, with shouts the skies they rend;
And flaming firebrands to the roofs ascend.
Himself, among the foremost, deals his blows,
And with his ax repeated strokes bestows
On the strong doors; then all their shoulders ply,
Till from the posts the brazen hinges fly.
He hews apace; the double bars at length
Yield to his ax and unresisted strength.
A mighty breach is made: the rooms conceal'd
Appear, and all the palace is reveal'd;
The halls of audience, and of public state,
And where the lonely queen in secret sate.
Arm'd soldiers now by trembling maids are seen,
With not a door, and scarce a space, between.
The house is fill'd with loud laments and cries,
And shrieks of women rend the vaulted skies;
The fearful matrons run from place to place,
And kiss the thresholds, and the posts embrace.
The fatal work inhuman Pyrrhus plies,
And all his father sparkles in his eyes;
Nor bars, nor fighting guards, his force sustain:
The bars are broken, and the guards are slain.
In rush the Greeks, and all the apartments fill;
Those few defendants whom they find, they kill.
Not with so fierce a rage the foaming flood
Roars, when he finds his rapid course withstood;
Bears down the dams with unresisted sway,
And sweeps the cattle and the cots away.
These eyes beheld him when he march'd between
The brother kings: I saw th' unhappy queen,
The hundred wives, and where old Priam stood,
To stain his hallow'd altar with his brood.
The fifty nuptial beds (such hopes had he,
So large a promise, of a progeny),
The posts, of plated gold, and hung with spoils,
Fell the reward of the proud victor's toils.
Where'er the raging fire had left a space,
The Grecians enter and possess the place.

"Perhaps you may of Priam's fate enquire.
He, when he saw his regal town on fire,
His ruin'd palace, and his ent'ring foes,
On ev'ry side inevitable woes,
In arms, disus'd, invests his limbs, decay'd,
Like them, with age; a late and useless aid.
His feeble shoulders scarce the weight sustain;
Loaded, not arm'd, he creeps along with pain,
Despairing of success, ambitious to be slain!
Uncover'd but by heav'n, there stood in view
An altar; near the hearth a laurel grew,
Dodder'd with age, whose boughs encompass round
The household gods, and shade the holy ground.
Here Hecuba, with all her helpless train
Of dames, for shelter sought, but sought in vain.
Driv'n like a flock of doves along the sky,
Their images they hug, and to their altars fly.
The Queen, when she beheld her trembling lord,
And hanging by his side a heavy sword,
'What rage,' she cried, 'has seiz'd my husband's mind?
What arms are these, and to what use design'd?
These times want other aids! Were Hector here,
Ev'n Hector now in vain, like Priam, would appear.
With us, one common shelter thou shalt find,
Or in one common fate with us be join'd.'
She said, and with a last salute embrac'd
The poor old man, and by the laurel plac'd.
Behold! Polites, one of Priam's sons,
Pursued by Pyrrhus, there for safety runs.
Thro' swords and foes, amaz'd and hurt, he flies
Thro' empty courts and open galleries.
Him Pyrrhus, urging with his lance, pursues,
And often reaches, and his thrusts renews.
The youth, transfix'd, with lamentable cries,
Expires before his wretched parent's eyes:
Whom gasping at his feet when Priam saw,
The fear of death gave place to nature's law;
And, shaking more with anger than with age,
'The gods,' said he, 'requite thy brutal rage!
As sure they will, barbarian, sure they must,
If there be gods in heav'n, and gods be just-
Who tak'st in wrongs an insolent delight;
With a son's death t' infect a father's sight.
Not he, whom thou and lying fame conspire
To call thee his- not he, thy vaunted sire,
Thus us'd my wretched age: the gods he fear'd,
The laws of nature and of nations heard.
He cheer'd my sorrows, and, for sums of gold,
The bloodless carcass of my Hector sold;
Pitied the woes a parent underwent,
And sent me back in safety from his tent.'

"This said, his feeble hand a javelin threw,
Which, flutt'ring, seem'd to loiter as it flew:
Just, and but barely, to the mark it held,
And faintly tinkled on the brazen shield.

"Then Pyrrhus thus: 'Go thou from me to fate,
And to my father my foul deeds relate.
Now die!' With that he dragg'd the trembling sire,
Slidd'ring thro' clotter'd blood and holy mire,
(The mingled paste his murder'd son had made,)
Haul'd from beneath the violated shade,
And on the sacred pile the royal victim laid.
His right hand held his bloody falchion bare,
His left he twisted in his hoary hair;
Then, with a speeding thrust, his heart he found:
The lukewarm blood came rushing thro' the wound,
And sanguine streams distain'd the sacred ground.
Thus Priam fell, and shar'd one common fate
With Troy in ashes, and his ruin'd state:
He, who the scepter of all Asia sway'd,
Whom monarchs like domestic slaves obey'd.
On the bleak shore now lies th' abandon'd king,
A headless carcass, and a nameless thing.

"Then, not before, I felt my cruddled blood
Congeal with fear, my hair with horror stood:
My father's image fill'd my pious mind,
Lest equal years might equal fortune find.
Again I thought on my forsaken wife,
And trembled for my son's abandon'd life.
I look'd about, but found myself alone,
Deserted at my need! My friends were gone.
Some spent with toil, some with despair oppress'd,
Leap'd headlong from the heights; the flames consum'd the rest.
Thus, wand'ring in my way, without a guide,
The graceless Helen in the porch I spied
Of Vesta's temple; there she lurk'd alone;
Muffled she sate, and, what she could, unknown:
But, by the flames that cast their blaze around,
That common bane of Greece and Troy I found.
For Ilium burnt, she dreads the Trojan sword;
More dreads the vengeance of her injur'd lord;
Ev'n by those gods who refug'd her abhorr'd.
Trembling with rage, the strumpet I regard,
Resolv'd to give her guilt the due reward:
'Shall she triumphant sail before the wind,
And leave in flames unhappy Troy behind?
Shall she her kingdom and her friends review,
In state attended with a captive crew,
While unreveng'd the good old Priam falls,
And Grecian fires consume the Trojan walls?
For this the Phrygian fields and Xanthian flood
Were swell'd with bodies, and were drunk with blood?
'T is true, a soldier can small honor gain,
And boast no conquest, from a woman slain:
Yet shall the fact not pass without applause,
Of vengeance taken in so just a cause;
The punish'd crime shall set my soul at ease,
And murm'ring manes of my friends appease.'
Thus while I rave, a gleam of pleasing light
Spread o'er the place; and, shining heav'nly bright,
My mother stood reveal'd before my sight
Never so radiant did her eyes appear;
Not her own star confess'd a light so clear:
Great in her charms, as when on gods above
She looks, and breathes herself into their love.
She held my hand, the destin'd blow to break;
Then from her rosy lips began to speak:
'My son, from whence this madness, this neglect
Of my commands, and those whom I protect?
Why this unmanly rage? Recall to mind
Whom you forsake, what pledges leave behind.
Look if your helpless father yet survive,
Or if Ascanius or Creusa live.
Around your house the greedy Grecians err;
And these had perish'd in the nightly war,
But for my presence and protecting care.
Not Helen's face, nor Paris, was in fault;
But by the gods was this destruction brought.
Now cast your eyes around, while I dissolve
The mists and films that mortal eyes involve,
Purge from your sight the dross, and make you see
The shape of each avenging deity.
Enlighten'd thus, my just commands fulfil,
Nor fear obedience to your mother's will.
Where yon disorder'd heap of ruin lies,
Stones rent from stones; where clouds of dust arise-
Amid that smother Neptune holds his place,
Below the wall's foundation drives his mace,
And heaves the building from the solid base.
Look where, in arms, imperial Juno stands
Full in the Scaean gate, with loud commands,
Urging on shore the tardy Grecian bands.
See! Pallas, of her snaky buckler proud,
Bestrides the tow'r, refulgent thro' the cloud:
See! Jove new courage to the foe supplies,
And arms against the town the partial deities.
Haste hence, my son; this fruitless labor end:
Haste, where your trembling spouse and sire attend:
Haste; and a mother's care your passage shall befriend.'
She said, and swiftly vanish'd from my sight,
Obscure in clouds and gloomy shades of night.
I look'd, I listen'd; dreadful sounds I hear;
And the dire forms of hostile gods appear.
Troy sunk in flames I saw (nor could prevent),
And Ilium from its old foundations rent;
Rent like a mountain ash, which dar'd the winds,
And stood the sturdy strokes of lab'ring hinds.
About the roots the cruel ax resounds;
The stumps are pierc'd with oft-repeated wounds:
The war is felt on high; the nodding crown
Now threats a fall, and throws the leafy honors down.
To their united force it yields, tho' late,
And mourns with mortal groans th' approaching fate:
The roots no more their upper load sustain;
But down she falls, and spreads a ruin thro' the plain.

"Descending thence, I scape thro' foes and fire:
Before the goddess, foes and flames retire.
Arriv'd at home, he, for whose only sake,
Or most for his, such toils I undertake,
The good Anchises, whom, by timely flight,
I purpos'd to secure on Ida's height,
Refus'd the journey, resolute to die
And add his fun'rals to the fate of Troy,
Rather than exile and old age sustain.
'Go you, whose blood runs warm in ev'ry vein.
Had Heav'n decreed that I should life enjoy,
Heav'n had decreed to save unhappy Troy.
'T is, sure, enough, if not too much, for one,
Twice to have seen our Ilium overthrown.
Make haste to save the poor remaining crew,
And give this useless corpse a long adieu.
These weak old hands suffice to stop my breath;
At least the pitying foes will aid my death,
To take my spoils, and leave my body bare:
As for my sepulcher, let Heav'n take care.
'T is long since I, for my celestial wife
Loath'd by the gods, have dragg'd a ling'ring life;
Since ev'ry hour and moment I expire,
Blasted from heav'n by Jove's avenging fire.'
This oft repeated, he stood fix'd to die:
Myself, my wife, my son, my family,
Intreat, pray, beg, and raise a doleful cry-
'What, will he still persist, on death resolve,
And in his ruin all his house involve!'
He still persists his reasons to maintain;
Our pray'rs, our tears, our loud laments, are vain.

"Urg'd by despair, again I go to try
The fate of arms, resolv'd in fight to die:
'What hope remains, but what my death must give?
Can I, without so dear a father, live?
You term it prudence, what I baseness call:
Could such a word from such a parent fall?
If Fortune please, and so the gods ordain,
That nothing should of ruin'd Troy remain,
And you conspire with Fortune to be slain,
The way to death is wide, th' approaches near:
For soon relentless Pyrrhus will appear,
Reeking with Priam's blood- the wretch who slew
The son (inhuman) in the father's view,
And then the sire himself to the dire altar drew.
O goddess mother, give me back to Fate;
Your gift was undesir'd, and came too late!
Did you, for this, unhappy me convey
Thro' foes and fires, to see my house a prey?
Shall I my father, wife, and son behold,
Welt'ring in blood, each other's arms infold?
Haste! gird my sword, tho' spent and overcome:
'T is the last summons to receive our doom.
I hear thee, Fate; and I obey thy call!
Not unreveng'd the foe shall see my fall.
Restore me to the yet unfinish'd fight:
My death is wanting to conclude the night.'
Arm'd once again, my glitt'ring sword I wield,
While th' other hand sustains my weighty shield,
And forth I rush to seek th' abandon'd field.
I went; but sad Creusa stopp'd my way,
And cross the threshold in my passage lay,
Embrac'd my knees, and, when I would have gone,
Shew'd me my feeble sire and tender son:
'If death be your design, at least,' said she,
'Take us along to share your destiny.
If any farther hopes in arms remain,
This place, these pledges of your love, maintain.
To whom do you expose your father's life,
Your son's, and mine, your now forgotten wife!'
While thus she fills the house with clam'rous cries,
Our hearing is diverted by our eyes:
For, while I held my son, in the short space
Betwixt our kisses and our last embrace;
Strange to relate, from young Iulus' head
A lambent flame arose, which gently spread
Around his brows, and on his temples fed.
Amaz'd, with running water we prepare
To quench the sacred fire, and slake his hair;
But old Anchises, vers'd in omens, rear'd
His hands to heav'n, and this request preferr'd:
'If any vows, almighty Jove, can bend
Thy will; if piety can pray'rs commend,
Confirm the glad presage which thou art pleas'd to send.'
Scarce had he said, when, on our left, we hear
A peal of rattling thunder roll in air:
There shot a streaming lamp along the sky,
Which on the winged lightning seem'd to fly;
From o'er the roof the blaze began to move,
And, trailing, vanish'd in th' Idaean grove.
It swept a path in heav'n, and shone a guide,
Then in a steaming stench of sulphur died.

"The good old man with suppliant hands implor'd
The gods' protection, and their star ador'd.
'Now, now,' said he, 'my son, no more delay!
I yield, I follow where Heav'n shews the way.
Keep, O my country gods, our dwelling place,
And guard this relic of the Trojan race,
This tender child! These omens are your own,
And you can yet restore the ruin'd town.
At least accomplish what your signs foreshow:
I stand resign'd, and am prepar'd to go.'

"He said. The crackling flames appear on high.
And driving sparkles dance along the sky.
With Vulcan's rage the rising winds conspire,
And near our palace roll the flood of fire.
'Haste, my dear father, ('t is no time to wait,)
And load my shoulders with a willing freight.
Whate'er befalls, your life shall be my care;
One death, or one deliv'rance, we will share.
My hand shall lead our little son; and you,
My faithful consort, shall our steps pursue.
Next, you, my servants, heed my strict commands:
Without the walls a ruin'd temple stands,
To Ceres hallow'd once; a cypress nigh
Shoots up her venerable head on high,
By long religion kept; there bend your feet,
And in divided parties let us meet.
Our country gods, the relics, and the bands,
Hold you, my father, in your guiltless hands:
In me 't is impious holy things to bear,
Red as I am with slaughter, new from war,
Till in some living stream I cleanse the guilt
Of dire debate, and blood in battle spilt.'
Thus, ord'ring all that prudence could provide,
I clothe my shoulders with a lion's hide
And yellow spoils; then, on my bending back,
The welcome load of my dear father take;
While on my better hand Ascanius hung,
And with unequal paces tripp'd along.
Creusa kept behind; by choice we stray
Thro' ev'ry dark and ev'ry devious way.
I, who so bold and dauntless, just before,
The Grecian darts and shock of lances bore,
At ev'ry shadow now am seiz'd with fear,
Not for myself, but for the charge I bear;
Till, near the ruin'd gate arriv'd at last,
Secure, and deeming all the danger past,
A frightful noise of trampling feet we hear.
My father, looking thro' the shades, with fear,
Cried out: 'Haste, haste, my son, the foes are nigh;
Their swords and shining armor I descry.'
Some hostile god, for some unknown offense,
Had sure bereft my mind of better sense;
For, while thro' winding ways I took my flight,
And sought the shelter of the gloomy night,
Alas! I lost Creusa: hard to tell
If by her fatal destiny she fell,
Or weary sate, or wander'd with affright;
But she was lost for ever to my sight.
I knew not, or reflected, till I meet
My friends, at Ceres' now deserted seat.
We met: not one was wanting; only she
Deceiv'd her friends, her son, and wretched me.

"What mad expressions did my tongue refuse!
Whom did I not, of gods or men, accuse!
This was the fatal blow, that pain'd me more
Than all I felt from ruin'd Troy before.
Stung with my loss, and raving with despair,
Abandoning my now forgotten care,
Of counsel, comfort, and of hope bereft,
My sire, my son, my country gods I left.
In shining armor once again I sheathe
My limbs, not feeling wounds, nor fearing death.
Then headlong to the burning walls I run,
And seek the danger I was forc'd to shun.
I tread my former tracks; thro' night explore
Each passage, ev'ry street I cross'd before.
All things were full of horror and affright,
And dreadful ev'n the silence of the night.
Then to my father's house I make repair,
With some small glimpse of hope to find her there.
Instead of her, the cruel Greeks I met;
The house was fill'd with foes, with flames beset.
Driv'n on the wings of winds, whole sheets of fire,
Thro' air transported, to the roofs aspire.
From thence to Priam's palace I resort,
And search the citadel and desart court.
Then, unobserv'd, I pass by Juno's church:
A guard of Grecians had possess'd the porch;
There Phoenix and Ulysses watch prey,
And thither all the wealth of Troy convey:
The spoils which they from ransack'd houses brought,
And golden bowls from burning altars caught,
The tables of the gods, the purple vests,
The people's treasure, and the pomp of priests.
A rank of wretched youths, with pinion'd hands,
And captive matrons, in long order stands.
Then, with ungovern'd madness, I proclaim,
Thro' all the silent street, Creusa's name:
Creusa still I call; at length she hears,
And sudden thro' the shades of night appears-
Appears, no more Creusa, nor my wife,
But a pale specter, larger than the life.
Aghast, astonish'd, and struck dumb with fear,
I stood; like bristles rose my stiffen'd hair.
Then thus the ghost began to soothe my grief
'Nor tears, nor cries, can give the dead relief.
Desist, my much-lov'd lord,'t indulge your pain;
You bear no more than what the gods ordain.
My fates permit me not from hence to fly;
Nor he, the great controller of the sky.
Long wand'ring ways for you the pow'rs decree;
On land hard labors, and a length of sea.
Then, after many painful years are past,
On Latium's happy shore you shall be cast,
Where gentle Tiber from his bed beholds
The flow'ry meadows, and the feeding folds.
There end your toils; and there your fates provide
A quiet kingdom, and a royal bride:
There fortune shall the Trojan line restore,
And you for lost Creusa weep no more.
Fear not that I shall watch, with servile shame,
Th' imperious looks of some proud Grecian dame;
Or, stooping to the victor's lust, disgrace
My goddess mother, or my royal race.
And now, farewell! The parent of the gods
Restrains my fleeting soul in her abodes:
I trust our common issue to your care.'
She said, and gliding pass'd unseen in air.
I strove to speak: but horror tied my tongue;
And thrice about her neck my arms I flung,
And, thrice deceiv'd, on vain embraces hung.
Light as an empty dream at break of day,
Or as a blast of wind, she rush'd away.

"Thus having pass'd the night in fruitless pain,
I to my longing friends return again,
Amaz'd th' augmented number to behold,
Of men and matrons mix'd, of young and old;
A wretched exil'd crew together brought,
With arms appointed, and with treasure fraught,
Resolv'd, and willing, under my command,
To run all hazards both of sea and land.
The Morn began, from Ida, to display
Her rosy cheeks; and Phosphor led the day:
Before the gates the Grecians took their post,
And all pretense of late relief was lost.
I yield to Fate, unwillingly retire,
And, loaded, up the hill convey my sire."

"When Heav'n had overturn'd the Trojan state
And Priam's throne, by too severe a fate;
When ruin'd Troy became the Grecians' prey,
And Ilium's lofty tow'rs in ashes lay;
Warn'd by celestial omens, we retreat,
To seek in foreign lands a happier seat.
Near old Antandros, and at Ida's foot,
The timber of the sacred groves we cut,
And build our fleet; uncertain yet to find
What place the gods for our repose assign'd.
Friends daily flock; and scarce the kindly spring
Began to clothe the ground, and birds to sing,
When old Anchises summon'd all to sea:
The crew my father and the Fates obey.
With sighs and tears I leave my native shore,
And empty fields, where Ilium stood before.
My sire, my son, our less and greater gods,
All sail at once, and cleave the briny floods.

"Against our coast appears a spacious land,
Which once the fierce Lycurgus did command,
(Thracia the name- the people bold in war;
Vast are their fields, and tillage is their care,)
A hospitable realm while Fate was kind,
With Troy in friendship and religion join'd.
I land; with luckless omens then adore
Their gods, and draw a line along the shore;
I lay the deep foundations of a wall,
And Aenos, nam'd from me, the city call.
To Dionaean Venus vows are paid,
And all the pow'rs that rising labors aid;
A bull on Jove's imperial altar laid.
Not far, a rising hillock stood in view;
Sharp myrtles on the sides, and cornels grew.
There, while I went to crop the sylvan scenes,
And shade our altar with their leafy greens,
I pull'd a plant- with horror I relate
A prodigy so strange and full of fate.
The rooted fibers rose, and from the wound
Black bloody drops distill'd upon the ground.
Mute and amaz'd, my hair with terror stood;
Fear shrunk my sinews, and congeal'd my blood.
Mann'd once again, another plant I try:
That other gush'd with the same sanguine dye.
Then, fearing guilt for some offense unknown,
With pray'rs and vows the Dryads I atone,
With all the sisters of the woods, and most
The God of Arms, who rules the Thracian coast,
That they, or he, these omens would avert,
Release our fears, and better signs impart.
Clear'd, as I thought, and fully fix'd at length
To learn the cause, I tugged with all my strength:
I bent my knees against the ground; once more
The violated myrtle ran with gore.
Scarce dare I tell the sequel: from the womb
Of wounded earth, and caverns of the tomb,
A groan, as of a troubled ghost, renew'd
My fright, and then these dreadful words ensued:
'Why dost thou thus my buried body rend?
O spare the corpse of thy unhappy friend!
Spare to pollute thy pious hands with blood:
The tears distil not from the wounded wood;
But ev'ry drop this living tree contains
Is kindred blood, and ran in Trojan veins.
O fly from this unhospitable shore,
Warn'd by my fate; for I am Polydore!
Here loads of lances, in my blood embrued,
Again shoot upward, by my blood renew'd.'

"My falt'ring tongue and shiv'ring limbs declare
My horror, and in bristles rose my hair.
When Troy with Grecian arms was closely pent,
Old Priam, fearful of the war's event,
This hapless Polydore to Thracia sent:
Loaded with gold, he sent his darling, far
From noise and tumults, and destructive war,
Committed to the faithless tyrant's care;
Who, when he saw the pow'r of Troy decline,
Forsook the weaker, with the strong to join;
Broke ev'ry bond of nature and of truth,
And murder'd, for his wealth, the royal youth.
O sacred hunger of pernicious gold!
What bands of faith can impious lucre hold?
Now, when my soul had shaken off her fears,
I call my father and the Trojan peers;
Relate the prodigies of Heav'n, require
What he commands, and their advice desire.
All vote to leave that execrable shore,
Polluted with the blood of Polydore;
But, ere we sail, his fun'ral rites prepare,
Then, to his ghost, a tomb and altars rear.
In mournful pomp the matrons walk the round,
With baleful cypress and blue fillets crown'd,
With eyes dejected, and with hair unbound.
Then bowls of tepid milk and blood we pour,
And thrice invoke the soul of Polydore.

"Now, when the raging storms no longer reign,
But southern gales invite us to the main,
We launch our vessels, with a prosp'rous wind,
And leave the cities and the shores behind.

"An island in th' Aegaean main appears;
Neptune and wat'ry Doris claim it theirs.
It floated once, till Phoebus fix'd the sides
To rooted earth, and now it braves the tides.
Here, borne by friendly winds, we come ashore,
With needful ease our weary limbs restore,
And the Sun's temple and his town adore.

"Anius, the priest and king, with laurel crown'd,
His hoary locks with purple fillets bound,
Who saw my sire the Delian shore ascend,
Came forth with eager haste to meet his friend;
Invites him to his palace; and, in sign
Of ancient love, their plighted hands they join.
Then to the temple of the god I went,
And thus, before the shrine, my vows present:
'Give, O Thymbraeus, give a resting place
To the sad relics of the Trojan race;
A seat secure, a region of their own,
A lasting empire, and a happier town.
Where shall we fix? where shall our labors end?
Whom shall we follow, and what fate attend?
Let not my pray'rs a doubtful answer find;
But in clear auguries unveil thy mind.'
Scarce had I said: he shook the holy ground,
The laurels, and the lofty hills around;
And from the tripos rush'd a bellowing sound.
Prostrate we fell; confess'd the present god,
Who gave this answer from his dark abode:
'Undaunted youths, go, seek that mother earth
From which your ancestors derive their birth.
The soil that sent you forth, her ancient race
In her old bosom shall again embrace.
Thro' the wide world th' Aeneian house shall reign,
And children's children shall the crown sustain.'
Thus Phoebus did our future fates disclose:
A mighty tumult, mix'd with joy, arose.

"All are concern'd to know what place the god
Assign'd, and where determin'd our abode.
My father, long revolving in his mind
The race and lineage of the Trojan kind,
Thus answer'd their demands: 'Ye princes, hear
Your pleasing fortune, and dispel your fear.
The fruitful isle of Crete, well known to fame,
Sacred of old to Jove's imperial name,
In the mid ocean lies, with large command,
And on its plains a hundred cities stand.
Another Ida rises there, and we
From thence derive our Trojan ancestry.
From thence, as 't is divulg'd by certain fame,
To the Rhoetean shores old Teucrus came;
There fix'd, and there the seat of empire chose,
Ere Ilium and the Trojan tow'rs arose.
In humble vales they built their soft abodes,
Till Cybele, the mother of the gods,
With tinkling cymbals charm'd th' Idaean woods,
She secret rites and ceremonies taught,
And to the yoke the savage lions brought.
Let us the land which Heav'n appoints, explore;
Appease the winds, and seek the Gnossian shore.
If Jove assists the passage of our fleet,
The third propitious dawn discovers Crete.'
Thus having said, the sacrifices, laid
On smoking altars, to the gods he paid:
A bull, to Neptune an oblation due,
Another bull to bright Apollo slew;
A milk-white ewe, the western winds to please,
And one coal-black, to calm the stormy seas.
Ere this, a flying rumor had been spread
That fierce Idomeneus from Crete was fled,
Expell'd and exil'd; that the coast was free
From foreign or domestic enemy.

"We leave the Delian ports, and put to sea;
By Naxos, fam'd for vintage, make our way;
Then green Donysa pass; and sail in sight
Of Paros' isle, with marble quarries white.
We pass the scatter'd isles of Cyclades,
That, scarce distinguish'd, seem to stud the seas.
The shouts of sailors double near the shores;
They stretch their canvas, and they ply their oars.
'All hands aloft! for Crete! for Crete!' they cry,
And swiftly thro' the foamy billows fly.
Full on the promis'd land at length we bore,
With joy descending on the Cretan shore.
With eager haste a rising town I frame,
Which from the Trojan Pergamus I name:
The name itself was grateful; I exhort
To found their houses, and erect a fort.
Our ships are haul'd upon the yellow strand;
The youth begin to till the labor'd land;
And I myself new marriages promote,
Give laws, and dwellings I divide by lot;
When rising vapors choke the wholesome air,
And blasts of noisome winds corrupt the year;
The trees devouring caterpillars burn;
Parch'd was the grass, and blighted was the corn:
Nor 'scape the beasts; for Sirius, from on high,
With pestilential heat infects the sky:
My men- some fall, the rest in fevers fry.
Again my father bids me seek the shore
Of sacred Delos, and the god implore,
To learn what end of woes we might expect,
And to what clime our weary course direct.

"'T was night, when ev'ry creature, void of cares,
The common gift of balmy slumber shares:
The statues of my gods (for such they seem'd),
Those gods whom I from flaming Troy redeem'd,
Before me stood, majestically bright,
Full in the beams of Phoebe's ent'ring light.
Then thus they spoke, and eas'd my troubled mind:
'What from the Delian god thou go'st to find,
He tells thee here, and sends us to relate.
Those pow'rs are we, companions of thy fate,
Who from the burning town by thee were brought,
Thy fortune follow'd, and thy safety wrought.
Thro' seas and lands as we thy steps attend,
So shall our care thy glorious race befriend.
An ample realm for thee thy fates ordain,
A town that o'er the conquer'd world shall reign.
Thou, mighty walls for mighty nations build;
Nor let thy weary mind to labors yield:
But change thy seat; for not the Delian god,
Nor we, have giv'n thee Crete for our abode.
A land there is, Hesperia call'd of old,
(The soil is fruitful, and the natives bold-
Th' Oenotrians held it once,) by later fame
Now call'd Italia, from the leader's name.
lasius there and Dardanus were born;
From thence we came, and thither must return.
Rise, and thy sire with these glad tidings greet.
Search Italy; for Jove denies thee Crete.'

"Astonish'd at their voices and their sight,
(Nor were they dreams, but visions of the night;
I saw, I knew their faces, and descried,
In perfect view, their hair with fillets tied;)
I started from my couch; a clammy sweat
On all my limbs and shiv'ring body sate.
To heav'n I lift my hands with pious haste,
And sacred incense in the flames I cast.
Thus to the gods their perfect honors done,
More cheerful, to my good old sire I run,
And tell the pleasing news. In little space
He found his error of the double race;
Not, as before he deem'd, deriv'd from Crete;
No more deluded by the doubtful seat:
Then said: 'O son, turmoil'd in Trojan fate!
Such things as these Cassandra did relate.
This day revives within my mind what she
Foretold of Troy renew'd in Italy,
And Latian lands; but who could then have thought
That Phrygian gods to Latium should be brought,
Or who believ'd what mad Cassandra taught?
Now let us go where Phoebus leads the way.'

"He said; and we with glad consent obey,
Forsake the seat, and, leaving few behind,
We spread our sails before the willing wind.
Now from the sight of land our galleys move,
With only seas around and skies above;
When o'er our heads descends a burst of rain,
And night with sable clouds involves the main;
The ruffling winds the foamy billows raise;
The scatter'd fleet is forc'd to sev'ral ways;
The face of heav'n is ravish'd from our eyes,
And in redoubled peals the roaring thunder flies.
Cast from our course, we wander in the dark.
No stars to guide, no point of land to mark.
Ev'n Palinurus no distinction found
Betwixt the night and day; such darkness reign'd around.
Three starless nights the doubtful navy strays,
Without distinction, and three sunless days;
The fourth renews the light, and, from our shrouds,
We view a rising land, like distant clouds;
The mountain-tops confirm the pleasing sight,
And curling smoke ascending from their height.
The canvas falls; their oars the sailors ply;
From the rude strokes the whirling waters fly.
At length I land upon the Strophades,
Safe from the danger of the stormy seas.
Those isles are compass'd by th' Ionian main,
The dire abode where the foul Harpies reign,
Forc'd by the winged warriors to repair
To their old homes, and leave their costly fare.
Monsters more fierce offended Heav'n ne'er sent
From hell's abyss, for human punishment:
With virgin faces, but with wombs obscene,
Foul paunches, and with ordure still unclean;
With claws for hands, and looks for ever lean.

"We landed at the port, and soon beheld
Fat herds of oxen graze the flow'ry field,
And wanton goats without a keeper stray'd.
With weapons we the welcome prey invade,
Then call the gods for partners of our feast,
And Jove himself, the chief invited guest.
We spread the tables on the greensward ground;
We feed with hunger, and the bowls go round;
When from the mountain-tops, with hideous cry,
And clatt'ring wings, the hungry Harpies fly;
They snatch the meat, defiling all they find,
And, parting, leave a loathsome stench behind.
Close by a hollow rock, again we sit,
New dress the dinner, and the beds refit,
Secure from sight, beneath a pleasing shade,
Where tufted trees a native arbor made.
Again the holy fires on altars burn;
And once again the rav'nous birds return,
Or from the dark recesses where they lie,
Or from another quarter of the sky;
With filthy claws their odious meal repeat,
And mix their loathsome ordures with their meat.
I bid my friends for vengeance then prepare,
And with the hellish nation wage the war.
They, as commanded, for the fight provide,
And in the grass their glitt'ring weapons hide;
Then, when along the crooked shore we hear
Their clatt'ring wings, and saw the foes appear,
Misenus sounds a charge: we take th' alarm,
And our strong hands with swords and bucklers arm.
In this new kind of combat all employ
Their utmost force, the monsters to destroy.
In vain- the fated skin is proof to wounds;
And from their plumes the shining sword rebounds.
At length rebuff'd, they leave their mangled prey,
And their stretch'd pinions to the skies display.
Yet one remain'd- the messenger of Fate:
High on a craggy cliff Celaeno sate,
And thus her dismal errand did relate:
'What! not contented with our oxen slain,
Dare you with Heav'n an impious war maintain,
And drive the Harpies from their native reign?
Heed therefore what I say; and keep in mind
What Jove decrees, what Phoebus has design'd,
And I, the Furies' queen, from both relate-
You seek th' Italian shores, foredoom'd by fate:
Th' Italian shores are granted you to find,
And a safe passage to the port assign'd.
But know, that ere your promis'd walls you build,
My curses shall severely be fulfill'd.
Fierce famine is your lot for this misdeed,
Reduc'd to grind the plates on which you feed.'
She said, and to the neighb'ring forest flew.
Our courage fails us, and our fears renew.
Hopeless to win by war, to pray'rs we fall,
And on th' offended Harpies humbly call,
And whether gods or birds obscene they were,
Our vows for pardon and for peace prefer.
But old Anchises, off'ring sacrifice,
And lifting up to heav'n his hands and eyes,
Ador'd the greater gods: 'Avert,' said he,
'These omens; render vain this prophecy,
And from th' impending curse a pious people free!'

"Thus having said, he bids us put to sea;
We loose from shore our haulsers, and obey,
And soon with swelling sails pursue the wat'ry way.
Amidst our course, Zacynthian woods appear;
And next by rocky Neritos we steer:
We fly from Ithaca's detested shore,
And curse the land which dire Ulysses bore.
At length Leucate's cloudy top appears,
And the Sun's temple, which the sailor fears.
Resolv'd to breathe a while from labor past,
Our crooked anchors from the prow we cast,
And joyful to the little city haste.
Here, safe beyond our hopes, our vows we pay
To Jove, the guide and patron of our way.
The customs of our country we pursue,
And Trojan games on Actian shores renew.
Our youth their naked limbs besmear with oil,
And exercise the wrastlers' noble toil;
Pleas'd to have sail'd so long before the wind,
And left so many Grecian towns behind.
The sun had now fulfill'd his annual course,
And Boreas on the seas display'd his force:
I fix'd upon the temple's lofty door
The brazen shield which vanquish'd Abas bore;
The verse beneath my name and action speaks:
'These arms Aeneas took from conqu'ring Greeks.'
Then I command to weigh; the seamen ply
Their sweeping oars; the smoking billows fly.
The sight of high Phaeacia soon we lost,
And skimm'd along Epirus' rocky coast.

"Then to Chaonia's port our course we bend,
And, landed, to Buthrotus' heights ascend.
Here wondrous things were loudly blaz'd fame:
How Helenus reviv'd the Trojan name,
And reign'd in Greece; that Priam's captive son
Succeeded Pyrrhus in his bed and throne;
And fair Andromache, restor'd by fate,
Once more was happy in a Trojan mate.
I leave my galleys riding in the port,
And long to see the new Dardanian court.
By chance, the mournful queen, before the gate,
Then solemniz'd her former husband's fate.
Green altars, rais'd of turf, with gifts she crown'd,
And sacred priests in order stand around,
And thrice the name of hapless Hector sound.
The grove itself resembles Ida's wood;
And Simois seem'd the well-dissembled flood.
But when at nearer distance she beheld
My shining armor and my Trojan shield,
Astonish'd at the sight, the vital heat
Forsakes her limbs; her veins no longer beat:
She faints, she falls, and scarce recov'ring strength,
Thus, with a falt'ring tongue, she speaks at length:

"'Are you alive, O goddess-born?' she said,
'Or if a ghost, then where is Hector's shade?'
At this, she cast a loud and frightful cry.
With broken words I made this brief reply:
'All of me that remains appears in sight;
I live, if living be to loathe the light.
No phantom; but I drag a wretched life,
My fate resembling that of Hector's wife.
What have you suffer'd since you lost your lord?
By what strange blessing are you now restor'd?
Still are you Hector's? or is Hector fled,
And his remembrance lost in Pyrrhus' bed?'
With eyes dejected, in a lowly tone,
After a modest pause she thus begun:

"'O only happy maid of Priam's race,
Whom death deliver'd from the foes' embrace!
Commanded on Achilles' tomb to die,
Not forc'd, like us, to hard captivity,
Or in a haughty master's arms to lie.
In Grecian ships unhappy we were borne,
Endur'd the victor's lust, sustain'd the scorn:
Thus I submitted to the lawless pride
Of Pyrrhus, more a handmaid than a bride.
Cloy'd with possession, he forsook my bed,
And Helen's lovely daughter sought to wed;
Then me to Trojan Helenus resign'd,
And his two slaves in equal marriage join'd;
Till young Orestes, pierc'd with deep despair,
And longing to redeem the promis'd fair,
Before Apollo's altar slew the ravisher.
By Pyrrhus' death the kingdom we regain'd:
At least one half with Helenus remain'd.
Our part, from Chaon, he Chaonia calls,
And names from Pergamus his rising walls.
But you, what fates have landed on our coast?
What gods have sent you, or what storms have toss'd?
Does young Ascanius life and health enjoy,
Sav'd from the ruins of unhappy Troy?
O tell me how his mother's loss he bears,
What hopes are promis'd from his blooming years,
How much of Hector in his face appears?'
She spoke; and mix'd her speech with mournful cries,
And fruitless tears came trickling from her eyes.

"At length her lord descends upon the plain,
In pomp, attended with a num'rous train;
Receives his friends, and to the city leads,
And tears of joy amidst his welcome sheds.
Proceeding on, another Troy I see,
Or, in less compass, Troy's epitome.
A riv'let by the name of Xanthus ran,
And I embrace the Scaean gate again.
My friends in porticoes were entertain'd,
And feasts and pleasures thro' the city reign'd.
The tables fill'd the spacious hall around,
And golden bowls with sparkling wine were crown'd.
Two days we pass'd in mirth, till friendly gales,
Blown from the south supplied our swelling sails.
Then to the royal seer I thus began:
'O thou, who know'st, beyond the reach of man,
The laws of heav'n, and what the stars decree;
Whom Phoebus taught unerring prophecy,
From his own tripod, and his holy tree;
Skill'd in the wing'd inhabitants of air,
What auspices their notes and flights declare:
O say- for all religious rites portend
A happy voyage, and a prosp'rous end;
And ev'ry power and omen of the sky
Direct my course for destin'd Italy;
But only dire Celaeno, from the gods,
A dismal famine fatally forebodes-
O say what dangers I am first to shun,
What toils vanquish, and what course to run.'

"The prophet first with sacrifice adores
The greater gods; their pardon then implores;
Unbinds the fillet from his holy head;
To Phoebus, next, my trembling steps he led,
Full of religious doubts and awful dread.
Then, with his god possess'd, before the shrine,
These words proceeded from his mouth divine:
'O goddess-born, (for Heav'n's appointed will,
With greater auspices of good than ill,
Foreshows thy voyage, and thy course directs;
Thy fates conspire, and Jove himself protects,)
Of many things some few I shall explain,
Teach thee to shun the dangers of the main,
And how at length the promis'd shore to gain.
The rest the fates from Helenus conceal,
And Juno's angry pow'r forbids to tell.
First, then, that happy shore, that seems so nigh,
Will far from your deluded wishes fly;
Long tracts of seas divide your hopes from Italy:
For you must cruise along Sicilian shores,
And stem the currents with your struggling oars;
Then round th' Italian coast your navy steer;
And, after this, to Circe's island veer;
And, last, before your new foundations rise,
Must pass the Stygian lake, and view the nether skies.
Now mark the signs of future ease and rest,
And bear them safely treasur'd in thy breast.
When, in the shady shelter of a wood,
And near the margin of a gentle flood,
Thou shalt behold a sow upon the ground,
With thirty sucking young encompass'd round;
The dam and offspring white as falling snow-
These on thy city shall their name bestow,
And there shall end thy labors and thy woe.
Nor let the threaten'd famine fright thy mind,
For Phoebus will assist, and Fate the way will find.
Let not thy course to that ill coast be bent,
Which fronts from far th' Epirian continent:
Those parts are all by Grecian foes possess'd;
The salvage Locrians here the shores infest;
There fierce Idomeneus his city builds,
And guards with arms the Salentinian fields;
And on the mountain's brow Petilia stands,
Which Philoctetes with his troops commands.
Ev'n when thy fleet is landed on the shore,
And priests with holy vows the gods adore,
Then with a purple veil involve your eyes,
Lest hostile faces blast the sacrifice.
These rites and customs to the rest commend,
That to your pious race they may descend.

 "'When, parted hence, the wind, that ready waits
For Sicily, shall bear you to the straits
Where proud Pelorus opes a wider way,
Tack to the larboard, and stand off to sea:
Veer starboard sea and land. Th' Italian shore
And fair Sicilia's coast were one, before
An earthquake caus'd the flaw: the roaring tides
The passage broke that land from land divides;
And where the lands retir'd, the rushing ocean rides.
Distinguish'd by the straits, on either hand,
Now rising cities in long order stand,
And fruitful fields: so much can time invade
The mold'ring work that beauteous Nature made.
Far on the right, her dogs foul Scylla hides:
Charybdis roaring on the left presides,
And in her greedy whirlpool sucks the tides;
Then spouts them from below: with fury driv'n,
The waves mount up and wash the face of heav'n.
But Scylla from her den, with open jaws,
The sinking vessel in her eddy draws,
Then dashes on the rocks. A human face,
And virgin bosom, hides her tail's disgrace:
Her parts obscene below the waves descend,
With dogs inclos'd, and in a dolphin end.
'T is safer, then, to bear aloof to sea,
And coast Pachynus, tho' with more delay,
Than once to view misshapen Scylla near,
And the loud yell of wat'ry wolves to hear.

"'Besides, if faith to Helenus be due,
And if prophetic Phoebus tell me true,
Do not this precept of your friend forget,
Which therefore more than once I must repeat:
Above the rest, great Juno's name adore;
Pay vows to Juno; Juno's aid implore.
Let gifts be to the mighty queen design'd,
And mollify with pray'rs her haughty mind.
Thus, at the length, your passage shall be free,
And you shall safe descend on Italy.
Arriv'd at Cumae, when you view the flood
Of black Avernus, and the sounding wood,
The mad prophetic Sibyl you shall find,
Dark in a cave, and on a rock reclin'd.
She sings the fates, and, in her frantic fits,
The notes and names, inscrib'd, to leafs commits.
What she commits to leafs, in order laid,
Before the cavern's entrance are display'd:
Unmov'd they lie; but, if a blast of wind
Without, or vapors issue from behind,
The leafs are borne aloft in liquid air,
And she resumes no more her museful care,
Nor gathers from the rocks her scatter'd verse,
Nor sets in order what the winds disperse.
Thus, many not succeeding, most upbraid
The madness of the visionary maid,
And with loud curses leave the mystic shade.

"'Think it not loss of time a while to stay,
Tho' thy companions chide thy long delay;
Tho' summon'd to the seas, tho' pleasing gales
Invite thy course, and stretch thy swelling sails:
But beg the sacred priestess to relate
With willing words, and not to write thy fate.
The fierce Italian people she will show,
And all thy wars, and all thy future woe,
And what thou may'st avoid, and what must undergo.
She shall direct thy course, instruct thy mind,
And teach thee how the happy shores to find.
This is what Heav'n allows me to relate:
Now part in peace; pursue thy better fate,
And raise, by strength of arms, the Trojan state.'

"This when the priest with friendly voice declar'd,
He gave me license, and rich gifts prepar'd:
Bounteous of treasure, he supplied my want
With heavy gold, and polish'd elephant;
Then Dodonaean caldrons put on board,
And ev'ry ship with sums of silver stor'd.
A trusty coat of mail to me he sent,
Thrice chain'd with gold, for use and ornament;
The helm of Pyrrhus added to the rest,
That flourish'd with a plume and waving crest.
Nor was my sire forgotten, nor my friends;
And large recruits he to my navy sends:
Men, horses, captains, arms, and warlike stores;
Supplies new pilots, and new sweeping oars.
Meantime, my sire commands to hoist our sails,
Lest we should lose the first auspicious gales.

"The prophet bless'd the parting crew, and last,
With words like these, his ancient friend embrac'd:
'Old happy man, the care of gods above,
Whom heav'nly Venus honor'd with her love,
And twice preserv'd thy life, when Troy was lost,
Behold from far the wish'd Ausonian coast:
There land; but take a larger compass round,
For that before is all forbidden ground.
The shore that Phoebus has design'd for you,
At farther distance lies, conceal'd from view.
Go happy hence, and seek your new abodes,
Blest in a son, and favor'd by the gods:
For I with useless words prolong your stay,
When southern gales have summon'd you away.'

"Nor less the queen our parting thence deplor'd,
Nor was less bounteous than her Trojan lord.
A noble present to my son she brought,
A robe with flow'rs on golden tissue wrought,
A phrygian vest; and loads with gifts beside
Of precious texture, and of Asian pride.
'Accept,' she said, 'these monuments of love,
Which in my youth with happier hands I wove:
Regard these trifles for the giver's sake;
'T is the last present Hector's wife can make.
Thou call'st my lost Astyanax to mind;
In thee his features and his form I find:
His eyes so sparkled with a lively flame;
Such were his motions; such was all his frame;
And ah! had Heav'n so pleas'd, his years had been the same.'

"With tears I took my last adieu, and said:
'Your fortune, happy pair, already made,
Leaves you no farther wish. My diff'rent state,
Avoiding one, incurs another fate.
To you a quiet seat the gods allow:
You have no shores to search, no seas to plow,
Nor fields of flying Italy to chase:
(Deluding visions, and a vain embrace!)
You see another Simois, and enjoy
The labor of your hands, another Troy,
With better auspice than her ancient tow'rs,
And less obnoxious to the Grecian pow'rs.
If e'er the gods, whom I with vows adore,
Conduct my steps to Tiber's happy shore;
If ever I ascend the Latian throne,
And build a city I may call my own;
As both of us our birth from Troy derive,
So let our kindred lines in concord live,
And both in acts of equal friendship strive.
Our fortunes, good or bad, shall be the same:
The double Troy shall differ but in name;
That what we now begin may never end,
But long to late posterity descend.'

"Near the Ceraunian rocks our course we bore;
The shortest passage to th' Italian shore.
Now had the sun withdrawn his radiant light,
And hills were hid in dusky shades of night:
We land, and, on the bosom Of the ground,
A safe retreat and a bare lodging found.
Close by the shore we lay; the sailors keep
Their watches, and the rest securely sleep.
The night, proceeding on with silent pace,
Stood in her noon, and view'd with equal face
Her steepy rise and her declining race.
Then wakeful Palinurus rose, to spy
The face of heav'n, and the nocturnal sky;
And listen'd ev'ry breath of air to try;
Observes the stars, and notes their sliding course,
The Pleiads, Hyads, and their wat'ry force;
And both the Bears is careful to behold,
And bright Orion, arm'd with burnish'd gold.
Then, when he saw no threat'ning tempest nigh,
But a sure promise of a settled sky,
He gave the sign to weigh; we break our sleep,
Forsake the pleasing shore, and plow the deep.

"And now the rising morn with rosy light
Adorns the skies, and puts the stars to flight;
When we from far, like bluish mists, descry
The hills, and then the plains, of Italy.
Achates first pronounc'd the joyful sound;
Then, 'Italy!' the cheerful crew rebound.
My sire Anchises crown'd a cup with wine,
And, off'ring, thus implor'd the pow'rs divine:
'Ye gods, presiding over lands and seas,
And you who raging winds and waves appease,
Breathe on our swelling sails a prosp'rous wind,
And smooth our passage to the port assign'd!'
The gentle gales their flagging force renew,
And now the happy harbor is in view.
Minerva's temple then salutes our sight,
Plac'd, as a landmark, on the mountain's height.
We furl our sails, and turn the prows to shore;
The curling waters round the galleys roar.
The land lies open to the raging east,
Then, bending like a bow, with rocks compress'd,
Shuts out the storms; the winds and waves complain,
And vent their malice on the cliffs in vain.
The port lies hid within; on either side
Two tow'ring rocks the narrow mouth divide.
The temple, which aloft we view'd before,
To distance flies, and seems to shun the shore.
Scarce landed, the first omens I beheld
Were four white steeds that cropp'd the flow'ry field.
'War, war is threaten'd from this foreign ground,'
My father cried, 'where warlike steeds are found.
Yet, since reclaim'd to chariots they submit,
And bend to stubborn yokes, and champ the bit,
Peace may succeed to war.' Our way we bend
To Pallas, and the sacred hill ascend;
There prostrate to the fierce virago pray,
Whose temple was the landmark of our way.
Each with a Phrygian mantle veil'd his head,
And all commands of Helenus obey'd,
And pious rites to Grecian Juno paid.
These dues perform'd, we stretch our sails, and stand
To sea, forsaking that suspected land.

"From hence Tarentum's bay appears in view,
For Hercules renown'd, if fame be true.
Just opposite, Lacinian Juno stands;
Caulonian tow'rs, and Scylacaean strands,
For shipwrecks fear'd. Mount Aetna thence we spy,
Known by the smoky flames which cloud the sky.
Far off we hear the waves with surly sound
Invade the rocks, the rocks their groans rebound.
The billows break upon the sounding strand,
And roll the rising tide, impure with sand.
Then thus Anchises, in experience old:
''T is that Charybdis which the seer foretold,
And those the promis'd rocks! Bear off to sea!'
With haste the frighted mariners obey.
First Palinurus to the larboard veer'd;
Then all the fleet by his example steer'd.
To heav'n aloft on ridgy waves we ride,
Then down to hell descend, when they divide;
And thrice our galleys knock'd the stony ground,
And thrice the hollow rocks return'd the sound,
And thrice we saw the stars, that stood with dews around.
The flagging winds forsook us, with the sun;
And, wearied, on Cyclopian shores we run.
The port capacious, and secure from wind,
Is to the foot of thund'ring Aetna join'd.
By turns a pitchy cloud she rolls on high;
By turns hot embers from her entrails fly,
And flakes of mounting flames, that lick the sky.
Oft from her bowels massy rocks are thrown,
And, shiver'd by the force, come piecemeal down.
Oft liquid lakes of burning sulphur flow,
Fed from the fiery springs that boil below.
Enceladus, they say, transfix'd by Jove,
With blasted limbs came tumbling from above;
And, where he fell, th' avenging father drew
This flaming hill, and on his body threw.
As often as he turns his weary sides,
He shakes the solid isle, and smoke the heavens hides.
In shady woods we pass the tedious night,
Where bellowing sounds and groans our souls affright,
Of which no cause is offer'd to the sight;
For not one star was kindled in the sky,
Nor could the moon her borrow'd light supply;
For misty clouds involv'd the firmament,
The stars were muffled, and the moon was pent.

"Scarce had the rising sun the day reveal'd,
Scarce had his heat the pearly dews dispell'd,
When from the woods there bolts, before our sight,
Somewhat betwixt a mortal and a sprite,
So thin, so ghastly meager, and so wan,
So bare of flesh, he scarce resembled man.
This thing, all tatter'd, seem'd from far t' implore
Our pious aid, and pointed to the shore.
We look behind, then view his shaggy beard;
His clothes were tagg'd with thorns, and filth his limbs
besmear'd;
The rest, in mien, in habit, and in face,
Appear'd a Greek, and such indeed he was.
He cast on us, from far, a frightful view,
Whom soon for Trojans and for foes he knew;
Stood still, and paus'd; then all at once began
To stretch his limbs, and trembled as he ran.
Soon as approach'd, upon his knees he falls,
And thus with tears and sighs for pity calls:
'Now, by the pow'rs above, and what we share
From Nature's common gift, this vital air,
O Trojans, take me hence! I beg no more;
But bear me far from this unhappy shore.
'T is true, I am a Greek, and farther own,
Among your foes besieg'd th' imperial town.
For such demerits if my death be due,
No more for this abandon'd life I sue;
This only favor let my tears obtain,
To throw me headlong in the rapid main:
Since nothing more than death my crime demands,
I die content, to die by human hands.'
He said, and on his knees my knees embrac'd:
I bade him boldly tell his fortune past,
His present state, his lineage, and his name,
Th' occasion of his fears, and whence he came.
The good Anchises rais'd him with his hand;
Who, thus encourag'd, answer'd our demand:
'From Ithaca, my native soil, I came
To Troy; and Achaemenides my name.
Me my poor father with Ulysses sent;
(O had I stay'd, with poverty content!)
But, fearful for themselves, my countrymen
Left me forsaken in the Cyclops' den.
The cave, tho' large, was dark; the dismal floor
Was pav'd with mangled limbs and putrid gore.
Our monstrous host, of more than human size,
Erects his head, and stares within the skies;
Bellowing his voice, and horrid is his hue.
Ye gods, remove this plague from mortal view!
The joints of slaughter'd wretches are his food;
And for his wine he quaffs the streaming blood.
These eyes beheld, when with his spacious hand
He seiz'd two captives of our Grecian band;
Stretch'd on his back, he dash'd against the stones
Their broken bodies, and their crackling bones:
With spouting blood the purple pavement swims,
While the dire glutton grinds the trembling limbs.

"'Not unreveng'd Ulysses bore their fate,
Nor thoughtless of his own unhappy state;
For, gorg'd with flesh, and drunk with human wine
While fast asleep the giant lay supine,
Snoring aloud, and belching from his maw
His indigested foam, and morsels raw;
We pray; we cast the lots, and then surround
The monstrous body, stretch'd along the ground:
Each, as he could approach him, lends a hand
To bore his eyeball with a flaming brand.
Beneath his frowning forehead lay his eye;
For only one did the vast frame supply-
But that a globe so large, his front it fill'd,
Like the sun's disk or like a Grecian shield.
The stroke succeeds; and down the pupil bends:
This vengeance follow'd for our slaughter'd friends.
But haste, unhappy wretches, haste to fly!
Your cables cut, and on your oars rely!
Such, and so vast as Polypheme appears,
A hundred more this hated island bears:
Like him, in caves they shut their woolly sheep;
Like him, their herds on tops of mountains keep;
Like him, with mighty strides, they stalk from steep to steep
And now three moons their sharpen'd horns renew,
Since thus, in woods and wilds, obscure from view,
I drag my loathsome days with mortal fright,
And in deserted caverns lodge by night;
Oft from the rocks a dreadful prospect see
Of the huge Cyclops, like a walking tree:
From far I hear his thund'ring voice resound,
And trampling feet that shake the solid ground.
Cornels and salvage berries of the wood,
And roots and herbs, have been my meager food.
While all around my longing eyes I cast,
I saw your happy ships appear at last.
On those I fix'd my hopes, to these I run;
'T is all I ask, this cruel race to shun;
What other death you please, yourselves bestow.'

"Scarce had he said, when on the mountain's brow
We saw the giant shepherd stalk before
His following flock, and leading to the shore:
A monstrous bulk, deform'd, depriv'd of sight;
His staff a trunk of pine, to guide his steps aright.
His pond'rous whistle from his neck descends;
His woolly care their pensive lord attends:
This only solace his hard fortune sends.
Soon as he reach'd the shore and touch'd the waves,
From his bor'd eye the gutt'ring blood he laves:
He gnash'd his teeth, and groan'd; thro' seas he strides,
And scarce the topmost billows touch'd his sides.

"Seiz'd with a sudden fear, we run to sea,
The cables cut, and silent haste away;
The well-deserving stranger entertain;
Then, buckling to the work, our oars divide the main.
The giant harken'd to the dashing sound:
But, when our vessels out of reach he found,
He strided onward, and in vain essay'd
Th' Ionian deep, and durst no farther wade.
With that he roar'd aloud: the dreadful cry
Shakes earth, and air, and seas; the billows fly
Before the bellowing noise to distant Italy.
The neigh'ring Aetna trembling all around,
The winding caverns echo to the sound.
His brother Cyclops hear the yelling roar,
And, rushing down the mountains, crowd the shore.
We saw their stern distorted looks, from far,
And one-eyed glance, that vainly threaten'd war:
A dreadful council, with their heads on high;
(The misty clouds about their foreheads fly;)
Not yielding to the tow'ring tree of Jove,
Or tallest cypress of Diana's grove.
New pangs of mortal fear our minds assail;
We tug at ev'ry oar, and hoist up ev'ry sail,
And take th' advantage of the friendly gale.
Forewarn'd by Helenus, we strive to shun
Charybdis' gulf, nor dare to Scylla run.
An equal fate on either side appears:
We, tacking to the left, are free from fears;
For, from Pelorus' point, the North arose,
And drove us back where swift Pantagias flows.
His rocky mouth we pass, and make our way
By Thapsus and Megara's winding bay.
This passage Achaemenides had shown,
Tracing the course which he before had run.

"Right o'er against Plemmyrium's wat'ry strand,
There lies an isle once call'd th' Ortygian land.
Alpheus, as old fame reports, has found
From Greece a secret passage under ground,
By love to beauteous Arethusa led;
And, mingling here, they roll in the same sacred bed.
As Helenus enjoin'd, we next adore
Diana's name, protectress of the shore.
With prosp'rous gales we pass the quiet sounds
Of still Elorus, and his fruitful bounds.
Then, doubling Cape Pachynus, we survey
The rocky shore extended to the sea.
The town of Camarine from far we see,
And fenny lake, undrain'd by fate's decree.
In sight of the Geloan fields we pass,
And the large walls, where mighty Gela was;
Then Agragas, with lofty summits crown'd,
Long for the race of warlike steeds renown'd.
We pass'd Selinus, and the palmy land,
And widely shun the Lilybaean strand,
Unsafe, for secret rocks and moving sand.
At length on shore the weary fleet arriv'd,
Which Drepanum's unhappy port receiv'd.
Here, after endless labors, often toss'd
By raging storms, and driv'n on ev'ry coast,
My dear, dear father, spent with age, I lost:
Ease of my cares, and solace of my pain,
Sav'd thro' a thousand toils, but sav'd in vain
The prophet, who my future woes reveal'd,
Yet this, the greatest and the worst, conceal'd;
And dire Celaeno, whose foreboding skill
Denounc'd all else, was silent of the ill.
This my last labor was. Some friendly god
From thence convey'd us to your blest abode."

Thus, to the list'ning queen, the royal guest
His wand'ring course and all his toils express'd;
And here concluding, he retir'd to rest.





But anxious cares already seiz'd the queen:
She fed within her veins a flame unseen;
The hero's valor, acts, and birth inspire
Her soul with love, and fan the secret fire.
His words, his looks, imprinted in her heart,
Improve the passion, and increase the smart.
Now, when the purple morn had chas'd away
The dewy shadows, and restor'd the day,
Her sister first with early care she sought,
And thus in mournful accents eas'd her thought:

"My dearest Anna, what new dreams affright
My lab'ring soul! what visions of the night
Disturb my quiet, and distract my breast
With strange ideas of our Trojan guest!
His worth, his actions, and majestic air,
A man descended from the gods declare.
Fear ever argues a degenerate kind;
His birth is well asserted by his mind.
Then, what he suffer'd, when by Fate betray'd!
What brave attempts for falling Troy he made!
Such were his looks, so gracefully he spoke,
That, were I not resolv'd against the yoke
Of hapless marriage, never to be curst
With second love, so fatal was my first,
To this one error I might yield again;
For, since Sichaeus was untimely slain,
This only man is able to subvert
The fix'd foundations of my stubborn heart.
And, to confess my frailty, to my shame,
Somewhat I find within, if not the same,
Too like the sparkles of my former flame.
But first let yawning earth a passage rend,
And let me thro' the dark abyss descend;
First let avenging Jove, with flames from high,
Drive down this body to the nether sky,
Condemn'd with ghosts in endless night to lie,
Before I break the plighted faith I gave!
No! he who had my vows shall ever have;
For, whom I lov'd on earth, I worship in the grave."

She said: the tears ran gushing from her eyes,
And stopp'd her speech. Her sister thus replies:
"O dearer than the vital air I breathe,
Will you to grief your blooming years bequeath,
Condemn'd to waste in woes your lonely life,
Without the joys of mother or of wife?
Think you these tears, this pompous train of woe,
Are known or valued by the ghosts below?
I grant that, while your sorrows yet were green,
It well became a woman, and a queen,
The vows of Tyrian princes to neglect,
To scorn Hyarbas, and his love reject,
With all the Libyan lords of mighty name;
But will you fight against a pleasing flame!
This little spot of land, which Heav'n bestows,
On ev'ry side is hemm'd with warlike foes;
Gaetulian cities here are spread around,
And fierce Numidians there your frontiers bound;
Here lies a barren waste of thirsty land,
And there the Syrtes raise the moving sand;
Barcaean troops besiege the narrow shore,
And from the sea Pygmalion threatens more.
Propitious Heav'n, and gracious Juno, lead
This wand'ring navy to your needful aid:
How will your empire spread, your city rise,
From such a union, and with such allies?
Implore the favor of the pow'rs above,
And leave the conduct of the rest to love.
Continue still your hospitable way,
And still invent occasions of their stay,
Till storms and winter winds shall cease to threat,
And planks and oars repair their shatter'd fleet."

These words, which from a friend and sister came,
With ease resolv'd the scruples of her fame,
And added fury to the kindled flame.
Inspir'd with hope, the project they pursue;
On ev'ry altar sacrifice renew:
A chosen ewe of two years old they pay
To Ceres, Bacchus, and the God of Day;
Preferring Juno's pow'r, for Juno ties
The nuptial knot and makes the marriage joys.
The beauteous queen before her altar stands,
And holds the golden goblet in her hands.
A milk-white heifer she with flow'rs adorns,
And pours the ruddy wine betwixt her horns;
And, while the priests with pray'r the gods invoke,
She feeds their altars with Sabaean smoke,
With hourly care the sacrifice renews,
And anxiously the panting entrails views.
What priestly rites, alas! what pious art,
What vows avail to cure a bleeding heart!
A gentle fire she feeds within her veins,
Where the soft god secure in silence reigns.

Sick with desire, and seeking him she loves,
From street to street the raving Dido roves.
So when the watchful shepherd, from the blind,
Wounds with a random shaft the careless hind,
Distracted with her pain she flies the woods,
Bounds o'er the lawn, and seeks the silent floods,
With fruitless care; for still the fatal dart
Sticks in her side, and rankles in her heart.
And now she leads the Trojan chief along
The lofty walls, amidst the busy throng;
Displays her Tyrian wealth, and rising town,
Which love, without his labor, makes his own.
This pomp she shows, to tempt her wand'ring guest;
Her falt'ring tongue forbids to speak the rest.
When day declines, and feasts renew the night,
Still on his face she feeds her famish'd sight;
She longs again to hear the prince relate
His own adventures and the Trojan fate.
He tells it o'er and o'er; but still in vain,
For still she begs to hear it once again.
The hearer on the speaker's mouth depends,
And thus the tragic story never ends.

Then, when they part, when Phoebe's paler light
Withdraws, and falling stars to sleep invite,
She last remains, when ev'ry guest is gone,
Sits on the bed he press'd, and sighs alone;
Absent, her absent hero sees and hears;
Or in her bosom young Ascanius bears,
And seeks the father's image in the child,
If love by likeness might be so beguil'd.

Meantime the rising tow'rs are at a stand;
No labors exercise the youthful band,
Nor use of arts, nor toils of arms they know;
The mole is left unfinish'd to the foe;
The mounds, the works, the walls, neglected lie,
Short of their promis'd heighth, that seem'd to threat the sky,

But when imperial Juno, from above,
Saw Dido fetter'd in the chains of love,
Hot with the venom which her veins inflam'd,
And by no sense of shame to be reclaim'd,
With soothing words to Venus she begun:
"High praises, endless honors, you have won,
And mighty trophies, with your worthy son!
Two gods a silly woman have undone!
Nor am I ignorant, you both suspect
This rising city, which my hands erect:
But shall celestial discord never cease?
'T is better ended in a lasting peace.
You stand possess'd of all your soul desir'd:
Poor Dido with consuming love is fir'd.
Your Trojan with my Tyrian let us join;
So Dido shall be yours, Aeneas mine:
One common kingdom, one united line.
Eliza shall a Dardan lord obey,
And lofty Carthage for a dow'r convey."
Then Venus, who her hidden fraud descried,
Which would the scepter of the world misguide
To Libyan shores, thus artfully replied:
"Who, but a fool, would wars with Juno choose,
And such alliance and such gifts refuse,
If Fortune with our joint desires comply?
The doubt is all from Jove and destiny;
Lest he forbid, with absolute command,
To mix the people in one common land-
Or will the Trojan and the Tyrian line
In lasting leagues and sure succession join?
But you, the partner of his bed and throne,
May move his mind; my wishes are your own."

"Mine," said imperial Juno, "be the care;
Time urges, now, to perfect this affair:
Attend my counsel, and the secret share.
When next the Sun his rising light displays,
And gilds the world below with purple rays,
The queen, Aeneas, and the Tyrian court
Shall to the shady woods, for sylvan game, resort.
There, while the huntsmen pitch their toils around,
And cheerful horns from side to side resound,
A pitchy cloud shall cover all the plain
With hail, and thunder, and tempestuous rain;
The fearful train shall take their speedy flight,
Dispers'd, and all involv'd in gloomy night;
One cave a grateful shelter shall afford
To the fair princess and the Trojan lord.
I will myself the bridal bed prepare,
If you, to bless the nuptials, will be there:
So shall their loves be crown'd with due delights,
And Hymen shall be present at the rites."
The Queen of Love consents, and closely smiles
At her vain project, and discover'd wiles.

The rosy morn was risen from the main,
And horns and hounds awake the princely train:
They issue early thro' the city gate,
Where the more wakeful huntsmen ready wait,
With nets, and toils, and darts, beside the force
Of Spartan dogs, and swift Massylian horse.
The Tyrian peers and officers of state
For the slow queen in antechambers wait;
Her lofty courser, in the court below,
Who his majestic rider seems to know,
Proud of his purple trappings, paws the ground,
And champs the golden bit, and spreads the foam around.
The queen at length appears; on either hand
The brawny guards in martial order stand.
A flow'r'd simar with golden fringe she wore,
And at her back a golden quiver bore;
Her flowing hair a golden caul restrains,
A golden clasp the Tyrian robe sustains.
Then young Ascanius, with a sprightly grace,
Leads on the Trojan youth to view the chase.
But far above the rest in beauty shines
The great Aeneas, the troop he joins;
Like fair Apollo, when he leaves the frost
Of wint'ry Xanthus, and the Lycian coast,
When to his native Delos he resorts,
Ordains the dances, and renews the sports;
Where painted Scythians, mix'd with Cretan bands,
Before the joyful altars join their hands:
Himself, on Cynthus walking, sees below
The merry madness of the sacred show.
Green wreaths of bays his length of hair inclose;
A golden fillet binds his awful brows;
His quiver sounds: not less the prince is seen
In manly presence, or in lofty mien.

Now had they reach'd the hills, and storm'd the seat
Of salvage beasts, in dens, their last retreat.
The cry pursues the mountain goats: they bound
From rock to rock, and keep the craggy ground;
Quite otherwise the stags, a trembling train,
In herds unsingled, scour the dusty plain,
And a long chase in open view maintain.
The glad Ascanius, as his courser guides,
Spurs thro' the vale, and these and those outrides.
His horse's flanks and sides are forc'd to feel
The clanking lash, and goring of the steel.
Impatiently he views the feeble prey,
Wishing some nobler beast to cross his way,
And rather would the tusky boar attend,
Or see the tawny lion downward bend.

Meantime, the gath'ring clouds obscure the skies:
From pole to pole the forky lightning flies;
The rattling thunders roll; and Juno pours
A wintry deluge down, and sounding show'rs.
The company, dispers'd, to converts ride,
And seek the homely cots, or mountain's hollow side.
The rapid rains, descending from the hills,
To rolling torrents raise the creeping rills.
The queen and prince, as love or fortune guides,
One common cavern in her bosom hides.
Then first the trembling earth the signal gave,
And flashing fires enlighten all the cave;
Hell from below, and Juno from above,
And howling nymphs, were conscious of their love.
From this ill-omen'd hour in time arose
Debate and death, and all succeeding woes.

The queen, whom sense of honor could not move,
No longer made a secret of her love,
But call'd it marriage, by that specious name
To veil the crime and sanctify the shame.

The loud report thro' Libyan cities goes.
Fame, the great ill, from small beginnings grows:
Swift from the first; and ev'ry moment brings
New vigor to her flights, new pinions to her wings.
Soon grows the pigmy to gigantic size;
Her feet on earth, her forehead in the skies.
Inrag'd against the gods, revengeful Earth
Produc'd her last of the Titanian birth.
Swift is her walk, more swift her winged haste:
A monstrous phantom, horrible and vast.
As many plumes as raise her lofty flight,
So many piercing eyes inlarge her sight;
Millions of opening mouths to Fame belong,
And ev'ry mouth is furnish'd with a tongue,
And round with list'ning ears the flying plague is hung.
She fills the peaceful universe with cries;
No slumbers ever close her wakeful eyes;
By day, from lofty tow'rs her head she shews,
And spreads thro' trembling crowds disastrous news;
With court informers haunts, and royal spies;
Things done relates, not done she feigns, and mingles truth with lies.

Talk is her business, and her chief delight
To tell of prodigies and cause affright.
She fills the people's ears with Dido's name,
Who, lost to honor and the sense of shame,
Admits into her throne and nuptial bed
A wand'ring guest, who from his country fled:
Whole days with him she passes in delights,
And wastes in luxury long winter nights,
Forgetful of her fame and royal trust,
Dissolv'd in ease, abandon'd to her lust.

The goddess widely spreads the loud report,
And flies at length to King Hyarba's court.
When first possess'd with this unwelcome news
Whom did he not of men and gods accuse?
This prince, from ravish'd Garamantis born,
A hundred temples did with spoils adorn,
In Ammon's honor, his celestial sire;
A hundred altars fed with wakeful fire;
And, thro' his vast dominions, priests ordain'd,
Whose watchful care these holy rites maintain'd.
The gates and columns were with garlands crown'd,
And blood of victim beasts enrich'd the ground.

He, when he heard a fugitive could move
The Tyrian princess, who disdain'd his love,
His breast with fury burn'd, his eyes with fire,
Mad with despair, impatient with desire;
Then on the sacred altars pouring wine,
He thus with pray'rs implor'd his sire divine:
"Great Jove! propitious to the Moorish race,
Who feast on painted beds, with off'rings grace
Thy temples, and adore thy pow'r divine
With blood of victims, and with sparkling wine,
Seest thou not this? or do we fear in vain
Thy boasted thunder, and thy thoughtless reign?
Do thy broad hands the forky lightnings lance?
Thine are the bolts, or the blind work of chance?
A wand'ring woman builds, within our state,
A little town, bought at an easy rate;
She pays me homage, and my grants allow
A narrow space of Libyan lands to plow;
Yet, scorning me, by passion blindly led,
Admits a banish'd Trojan to her bed!
And now this other Paris, with his train
Of conquer'd cowards, must in Afric reign!
(Whom, what they are, their looks and garb confess,
Their locks with oil perfum'd, their Lydian dress.)
He takes the spoil, enjoys the princely dame;
And I, rejected I, adore an empty name."

His vows, in haughty terms, he thus preferr'd,
And held his altar's horns. The mighty Thund'rer heard;
Then cast his eyes on Carthage, where he found
The lustful pair in lawless pleasure drown'd,
Lost in their loves, insensible of shame,
And both forgetful of their better fame.
He calls Cyllenius, and the god attends,
By whom his menacing command he sends:
"Go, mount the western winds, and cleave the sky;
Then, with a swift descent, to Carthage fly:
There find the Trojan chief, who wastes his days
In slothful riot and inglorious ease,
Nor minds the future city, giv'n by fate.
To him this message from my mouth relate:
'Not so fair Venus hop'd, when twice she won
Thy life with pray'rs, nor promis'd such a son.
Hers was a hero, destin'd to command
A martial race, and rule the Latian land,
Who should his ancient line from Teucer draw,
And on the conquer'd world impose the law.'
If glory cannot move a mind so mean,
Nor future praise from fading pleasure wean,
Yet why should he defraud his son of fame,
And grudge the Romans their immortal name!
What are his vain designs! what hopes he more
From his long ling'ring on a hostile shore,
Regardless to redeem his honor lost,
And for his race to gain th' Ausonian coast!
Bid him with speed the Tyrian court forsake;
With this command the slumb'ring warrior wake."

Hermes obeys; with golden pinions binds
His flying feet, and mounts the western winds:
And, whether o'er the seas or earth he flies,
With rapid force they bear him down the skies.
But first he grasps within his awful hand
The mark of sov'reign pow'r, his magic wand;
With this he draws the ghosts from hollow graves;
With this he drives them down the Stygian waves;
With this he seals in sleep the wakeful sight,
And eyes, tho' clos'd in death, restores to light.
Thus arm'd, the god begins his airy race,
And drives the racking clouds along the liquid space;
Now sees the tops of Atlas, as he flies,
Whose brawny back supports the starry skies;
Atlas, whose head, with piny forests crown'd,
Is beaten by the winds, with foggy vapors bound.
Snows hide his shoulders; from beneath his chin
The founts of rolling streams their race begin;
A beard of ice on his large breast depends.
Here, pois'd upon his wings, the god descends:
Then, rested thus, he from the tow'ring height
Plung'd downward, with precipitated flight,
Lights on the seas, and skims along the flood.
As waterfowl, who seek their fishy food,
Less, and yet less, to distant prospect show;
By turns they dance aloft, and dive below:
Like these, the steerage of his wings he plies,
And near the surface of the water flies,
Till, having pass'd the seas, and cross'd the sands,
He clos'd his wings, and stoop'd on Libyan lands:
Where shepherds once were hous'd in homely sheds,
Now tow'rs within the clouds advance their heads.
Arriving there, he found the Trojan prince
New ramparts raising for the town's defense.
A purple scarf, with gold embroider'd o'er,
(Queen Dido's gift,) about his waist he wore;
A sword, with glitt'ring gems diversified,
For ornament, not use, hung idly by his side.

Then thus, with winged words, the god began,
Resuming his own shape: "Degenerate man,
Thou woman's property, what mak'st thou here,
These foreign walls and Tyrian tow'rs to rear,
Forgetful of thy own? All-pow'rful Jove,
Who sways the world below and heav'n above,
Has sent me down with this severe command:
What means thy ling'ring in the Libyan land?
If glory cannot move a mind so mean,
Nor future praise from flitting pleasure wean,
Regard the fortunes of thy rising heir:
The promis'd crown let young Ascanius wear,
To whom th' Ausonian scepter, and the state
Of Rome's imperial name is ow'd by fate."
So spoke the god; and, speaking, took his flight,
Involv'd in clouds, and vanish'd out of sight.

The pious prince was seiz'd with sudden fear;
Mute was his tongue, and upright stood his hair.
Revolving in his mind the stern command,
He longs to fly, and loathes the charming land.
What should he say? or how should he begin?
What course, alas! remains to steer between
Th' offended lover and the pow'rful queen?
This way and that he turns his anxious mind,
And all expedients tries, and none can find.
Fix'd on the deed, but doubtful of the means,
After long thought, to this advice he leans:
Three chiefs he calls, commands them to repair
The fleet, and ship their men with silent care;
Some plausible pretense he bids them find,
To color what in secret he design'd.
Himself, meantime, the softest hours would choose,
Before the love-sick lady heard the news;
And move her tender mind, by slow degrees,
To suffer what the sov'reign pow'r decrees:
Jove will inspire him, when, and what to say.
They hear with pleasure, and with haste obey.

But soon the queen perceives the thin disguise:
(What arts can blind a jealous woman's eyes!)
She was the first to find the secret fraud,
Before the fatal news was blaz'd abroad.
Love the first motions of the lover hears,
Quick to presage, and ev'n in safety fears.
Nor impious Fame was wanting to report
The ships repair'd, the Trojans' thick resort,
And purpose to forsake the Tyrian court.
Frantic with fear, impatient of the wound,
And impotent of mind, she roves the city round.
Less wild the Bacchanalian dames appear,
When, from afar, their nightly god they hear,
And howl about the hills, and shake the wreathy spear.
At length she finds the dear perfidious man;
Prevents his form'd excuse, and thus began:
"Base and ungrateful! could you hope to fly,
And undiscover'd scape a lover's eye?
Nor could my kindness your compassion move.
Nor plighted vows, nor dearer bands of love?
Or is the death of a despairing queen
Not worth preventing, tho' too well foreseen?
Ev'n when the wintry winds command your stay,
You dare the tempests, and defy the sea.
False as you are, suppose you were not bound
To lands unknown, and foreign coasts to sound;
Were Troy restor'd, and Priam's happy reign,
Now durst you tempt, for Troy, the raging main?
See whom you fly! am I the foe you shun?
Now, by those holy vows, so late begun,
By this right hand, (since I have nothing more
To challenge, but the faith you gave before;)
I beg you by these tears too truly shed,
By the new pleasures of our nuptial bed;
If ever Dido, when you most were kind,
Were pleasing in your eyes, or touch'd your mind;
By these my pray'rs, if pray'rs may yet have place,
Pity the fortunes of a falling race.
For you I have provok'd a tyrant's hate,
Incens'd the Libyan and the Tyrian state;
For you alone I suffer in my fame,
Bereft of honor, and expos'd to shame.
Whom have I now to trust, ungrateful guest?
(That only name remains of all the rest!)
What have I left? or whither can I fly?
Must I attend Pygmalion's cruelty,
Or till Hyarba shall in triumph lead
A queen that proudly scorn'd his proffer'd bed?
Had you deferr'd, at least, your hasty flight,
And left behind some pledge of our delight,
Some babe to bless the mother's mournful sight,
Some young Aeneas, to supply your place,
Whose features might express his father's face;
I should not then complain to live bereft
Of all my husband, or be wholly left."

Here paus'd the queen. Unmov'd he holds his eyes,
By Jove's command; nor suffer'd love to rise,
Tho' heaving in his heart; and thus at length replies:
"Fair queen, you never can enough repeat
Your boundless favors, or I own my debt;
Nor can my mind forget Eliza's name,
While vital breath inspires this mortal frame.
This only let me speak in my defense:
I never hop'd a secret flight from hence,
Much less pretended to the lawful claim
Of sacred nuptials, or a husband's name.
For, if indulgent Heav'n would leave me free,
And not submit my life to fate's decree,
My choice would lead me to the Trojan shore,
Those relics to review, their dust adore,
And Priam's ruin'd palace to restore.
But now the Delphian oracle commands,
And fate invites me to the Latian lands.
That is the promis'd place to which I steer,
And all my vows are terminated there.
If you, a Tyrian, and a stranger born,
With walls and tow'rs a Libyan town adorn,
Why may not we- like you, a foreign race-
Like you, seek shelter in a foreign place?
As often as the night obscures the skies
With humid shades, or twinkling stars arise,
Anchises' angry ghost in dreams appears,
Chides my delay, and fills my soul with fears;
And young Ascanius justly may complain
Of his defrauded and destin'd reign.
Ev'n now the herald of the gods appear'd:
Waking I saw him, and his message heard.
From Jove he came commission'd, heav'nly bright
With radiant beams, and manifest to sight
(The sender and the sent I both attest)
These walls he enter'd, and those words express'd.
Fair queen, oppose not what the gods command;
Forc'd by my fate, I leave your happy land."

Thus while he spoke, already she began,
With sparkling eyes, to view the guilty man;
From head to foot survey'd his person o'er,
Nor longer these outrageous threats forebore:
"False as thou art, and, more than false, forsworn!
Not sprung from noble blood, nor goddess-born,
But hewn from harden'd entrails of a rock!
And rough Hyrcanian tigers gave thee suck!
Why should I fawn? what have I worse to fear?
Did he once look, or lent a list'ning ear,
Sigh'd when I sobb'd, or shed one kindly tear?-
All symptoms of a base ungrateful mind,
So foul, that, which is worse, 'tis hard to find.
Of man's injustice why should I complain?
The gods, and Jove himself, behold in vain
Triumphant treason; yet no thunder flies,
Nor Juno views my wrongs with equal eyes;
Faithless is earth, and faithless are the skies!
Justice is fled, and Truth is now no more!
I sav'd the shipwrack'd exile on my shore;
With needful food his hungry Trojans fed;
I took the traitor to my throne and bed:
Fool that I was- 't is little to repeat
The rest- I stor'd and rigg'd his ruin'd fleet.
I rave, I rave! A god's command he pleads,
And makes Heav'n accessary to his deeds.
Now Lycian lots, and now the Delian god,
Now Hermes is employ'd from Jove's abode,
To warn him hence; as if the peaceful state
Of heav'nly pow'rs were touch'd with human fate!
But go! thy flight no longer I detain-
Go seek thy promis'd kingdom thro' the main!
Yet, if the heav'ns will hear my pious vow,
The faithless waves, not half so false as thou,
Or secret sands, shall sepulchers afford
To thy proud vessels, and their perjur'd lord.
Then shalt thou call on injur'd Dido's name:
Dido shall come in a black sulph'ry flame,
When death has once dissolv'd her mortal frame;
Shall smile to see the traitor vainly weep:
Her angry ghost, arising from the deep,
Shall haunt thee waking, and disturb thy sleep.
At least my shade thy punishment shall know,
And Fame shall spread the pleasing news below."

Abruptly here she stops; then turns away
Her loathing eyes, and shuns the sight of day.
Amaz'd he stood, revolving in his mind
What speech to frame, and what excuse to find.
Her fearful maids their fainting mistress led,
And softly laid her on her ivory bed.

But good Aeneas, tho' he much desir'd
To give that pity which her grief requir'd;
Tho' much he mourn'd, and labor'd with his love,
Resolv'd at length, obeys the will of Jove;
Reviews his forces: they with early care
Unmoor their vessels, and for sea prepare.
The fleet is soon afloat, in all its pride,
And well-calk'd galleys in the harbor ride.
Then oaks for oars they fell'd; or, as they stood,
Of its green arms despoil'd the growing wood,
Studious of flight. The beach is cover'd o'er
With Trojan bands, that blacken all the shore:
On ev'ry side are seen, descending down,
Thick swarms of soldiers, loaden from the town.
Thus, in battalia, march embodied ants,
Fearful of winter, and of future wants,
T' invade the corn, and to their cells convey
The plunder'd forage of their yellow prey.
The sable troops, along the narrow tracks,
Scarce bear the weighty burthen on their backs:
Some set their shoulders to the pond'rous grain;
Some guard the spoil; some lash the lagging train;
All ply their sev'ral tasks, and equal toil sustain.

What pangs the tender breast of Dido tore,
When, from the tow'r, she saw the cover'd shore,
And heard the shouts of sailors from afar,
Mix'd with the murmurs of the wat'ry war!
All-pow'rful Love! what changes canst thou cause
In human hearts, subjected to thy laws!
Once more her haughty soul the tyrant bends:
To pray'rs and mean submissions she descends.
No female arts or aids she left untried,
Nor counsels unexplor'd, before she died.
"Look, Anna! look! the Trojans crowd to sea;
They spread their canvas, and their anchors weigh.
The shouting crew their ships with garlands bind,
Invoke the sea gods, and invite the wind.
Could I have thought this threat'ning blow so near,
My tender soul had been forewarn'd to bear.
But do not you my last request deny;
With yon perfidious man your int'rest try,
And bring me news, if I must live or die.
You are his fav'rite; you alone can find
The dark recesses of his inmost mind:
In all his trusted secrets you have part,
And know the soft approaches to his heart.
Haste then, and humbly seek my haughty foe;
Tell him, I did not with the Grecians go,
Nor did my fleet against his friends employ,
Nor swore the ruin of unhappy Troy,
Nor mov'd with hands profane his father's dust:
Why should he then reject a suit so just!
Whom does he shun, and whither would he fly!
Can he this last, this only pray'r deny!
Let him at least his dang'rous flight delay,
Wait better winds, and hope a calmer sea.
The nuptials he disclaims I urge no more:
Let him pursue the promis'd Latian shore.
A short delay is all I ask him now;
A pause of grief, an interval from woe,
Till my soft soul be temper'd to sustain
Accustom'd sorrows, and inur'd to pain.
If you in pity grant this one request,
My death shall glut the hatred of his breast."
This mournful message pious Anna bears,
And seconds with her own her sister's tears:
But all her arts are still employ'd in vain;
Again she comes, and is refus'd again.
His harden'd heart nor pray'rs nor threat'nings move;
Fate, and the god, had stopp'd his ears to love.

As, when the winds their airy quarrel try,
Justling from ev'ry quarter of the sky,
This way and that the mountain oak they bend,
His boughs they shatter, and his branches rend;
With leaves and falling mast they spread the ground;
The hollow valleys echo to the sound:
Unmov'd, the royal plant their fury mocks,
Or, shaken, clings more closely to the rocks;
Far as he shoots his tow'ring head on high,
So deep in earth his fix'd foundations lie.
No less a storm the Trojan hero bears;
Thick messages and loud complaints he hears,
And bandied words, still beating on his ears.
Sighs, groans, and tears proclaim his inward pains;
But the firm purpose of his heart remains.

The wretched queen, pursued by cruel fate,
Begins at length the light of heav'n to hate,
And loathes to live. Then dire portents she sees,
To hasten on the death her soul decrees:
Strange to relate! for when, before the shrine,
She pours in sacrifice the purple wine,
The purple wine is turn'd to putrid blood,
And the white offer'd milk converts to mud.
This dire presage, to her alone reveal'd,
From all, and ev'n her sister, she conceal'd.
A marble temple stood within the grove,
Sacred to death, and to her murther'd love;
That honor'd chapel she had hung around
With snowy fleeces, and with garlands crown'd:
Oft, when she visited this lonely dome,
Strange voices issued from her husband's tomb;
She thought she heard him summon her away,
Invite her to his grave, and chide her stay.
Hourly 't is heard, when with a boding note
The solitary screech owl strains her throat,
And, on a chimney's top, or turret's height,
With songs obscene disturbs the silence of the night.
Besides, old prophecies augment her fears;
And stern Aeneas in her dreams appears,
Disdainful as by day: she seems, alone,
To wander in her sleep, thro' ways unknown,
Guideless and dark; or, in a desart plain,
To seek her subjects, and to seek in vain:
Like Pentheus, when, distracted with his fear,
He saw two suns, and double Thebes, appear;
Or mad Orestes, when his mother's ghost
Full in his face infernal torches toss'd,
And shook her snaky locks: he shuns the sight,
Flies o'er the stage, surpris'd with mortal fright;
The Furies guard the door and intercept his flight.

Now, sinking underneath a load of grief,
From death alone she seeks her last relief;
The time and means resolv'd within her breast,
She to her mournful sister thus address'd
(Dissembling hope, her cloudy front she clears,
And a false vigor in her eyes appears):
"Rejoice!" she said. "Instructed from above,
My lover I shall gain, or lose my love.
Nigh rising Atlas, next the falling sun,
Long tracts of Ethiopian climates run:
There a Massylian priestess I have found,
Honor'd for age, for magic arts renown'd:
Th' Hesperian temple was her trusted care;
'T was she supplied the wakeful dragon's fare.
She poppy seeds in honey taught to steep,
Reclaim'd his rage, and sooth'd him into sleep.
She watch'd the golden fruit; her charms unbind
The chains of love, or fix them on the mind:
She stops the torrents, leaves the channel dry,
Repels the stars, and backward bears the sky.
The yawning earth rebellows to her call,
Pale ghosts ascend, and mountain ashes fall.
Witness, ye gods, and thou my better part,
How loth I am to try this impious art!
Within the secret court, with silent care,
Erect a lofty pile, expos'd in air:
Hang on the topmost part the Trojan vest,
Spoils, arms, and presents, of my faithless guest.
Next, under these, the bridal bed be plac'd,
Where I my ruin in his arms embrac'd:
All relics of the wretch are doom'd to fire;
For so the priestess and her charms require."

Thus far she said, and farther speech forbears;
A mortal paleness in her face appears:
Yet the mistrustless Anna could not find
The secret fun'ral in these rites design'd;
Nor thought so dire a rage possess'd her mind.
Unknowing of a train conceal'd so well,
She fear'd no worse than when Sichaeus fell;
Therefore obeys. The fatal pile they rear,
Within the secret court, expos'd in air.
The cloven holms and pines are heap'd on high,
And garlands on the hollow spaces lie.
Sad cypress, vervain, yew, compose the wreath,
And ev'ry baleful green denoting death.
The queen, determin'd to the fatal deed,
The spoils and sword he left, in order spread,
And the man's image on the nuptial bed.

And now (the sacred altars plac'd around)
The priestess enters, with her hair unbound,
And thrice invokes the pow'rs below the ground.
Night, Erebus, and Chaos she proclaims,
And threefold Hecate, with her hundred names,
And three Dianas: next, she sprinkles round
With feign'd Avernian drops the hallow'd ground;
Culls hoary simples, found by Phoebe's light,
With brazen sickles reap'd at noon of night;
Then mixes baleful juices in the bowl,
And cuts the forehead of a newborn foal,
Robbing the mother's love. The destin'd queen
Observes, assisting at the rites obscene;
A leaven'd cake in her devoted hands
She holds, and next the highest altar stands:
One tender foot was shod, her other bare;
Girt was her gather'd gown, and loose her hair.
Thus dress'd, she summon'd, with her dying breath,
The heav'ns and planets conscious of her death,
And ev'ry pow'r, if any rules above,
Who minds, or who revenges, injur'd love.

"'T was dead of night, when weary bodies close
Their eyes in balmy sleep and soft repose:
The winds no longer whisper thro' the woods,
Nor murm'ring tides disturb the gentle floods.
The stars in silent order mov'd around;
And Peace, with downy wings, was brooding on the ground
The flocks and herds, and party-color'd fowl,
Which haunt the woods, or swim the weedy pool,
Stretch'd on the quiet earth, securely lay,
Forgetting the past labors of the day.
All else of nature's common gift partake:
Unhappy Dido was alone awake.
Nor sleep nor ease the furious queen can find;
Sleep fled her eyes, as quiet fled her mind.
Despair, and rage, and love divide her heart;
Despair and rage had some, but love the greater part.

Then thus she said within her secret mind:
"What shall I do? what succor can I find?
Become a suppliant to Hyarba's pride,
And take my turn, to court and be denied?
Shall I with this ungrateful Trojan go,
Forsake an empire, and attend a foe?
Himself I refug'd, and his train reliev'd-
'T is true- but am I sure to be receiv'd?
Can gratitude in Trojan souls have place!
Laomedon still lives in all his race!
Then, shall I seek alone the churlish crew,
Or with my fleet their flying sails pursue?
What force have I but those whom scarce before
I drew reluctant from their native shore?
Will they again embark at my desire,
Once more sustain the seas, and quit their second Tyre?
Rather with steel thy guilty breast invade,
And take the fortune thou thyself hast made.
Your pity, sister, first seduc'd my mind,
Or seconded too well what I design'd.
These dear-bought pleasures had I never known,
Had I continued free, and still my own;
Avoiding love, I had not found despair,
But shar'd with salvage beasts the common air.
Like them, a lonely life I might have led,
Not mourn'd the living, nor disturb'd the dead."
These thoughts she brooded in her anxious breast.
On board, the Trojan found more easy rest.
Resolv'd to sail, in sleep he pass'd the night;
And order'd all things for his early flight.

To whom once more the winged god appears;
His former youthful mien and shape he wears,
And with this new alarm invades his ears:
"Sleep'st thou, O goddess-born! and canst thou drown
Thy needful cares, so near a hostile town,
Beset with foes; nor hear'st the western gales
Invite thy passage, and inspire thy sails?
She harbors in her heart a furious hate,
And thou shalt find the dire effects too late;
Fix'd on revenge, and obstinate to die.
Haste swiftly hence, while thou hast pow'r to fly.
The sea with ships will soon be cover'd o'er,
And blazing firebrands kindle all the shore.
Prevent her rage, while night obscures the skies,
And sail before the purple morn arise.
Who knows what hazards thy delay may bring?
Woman's a various and a changeful thing."
Thus Hermes in the dream; then took his flight
Aloft in air unseen, and mix'd with night.

Twice warn'd by the celestial messenger,
The pious prince arose with hasty fear;
Then rous'd his drowsy train without delay:
"Haste to your banks; your crooked anchors weigh,
And spread your flying sails, and stand to sea.
A god commands: he stood before my sight,
And urg'd us once again to speedy flight.
O sacred pow'r, what pow'r soe'er thou art,
To thy blest orders I resign my heart.
Lead thou the way; protect thy Trojan bands,
And prosper the design thy will commands."
He said: and, drawing forth his flaming sword,
His thund'ring arm divides the many-twisted cord.
An emulating zeal inspires his train:
They run; they snatch; they rush into the main.
With headlong haste they leave the desert shores,
And brush the liquid seas with lab'ring oars.

Aurora now had left her saffron bed,
And beams of early light the heav'ns o'erspread,
When, from a tow'r, the queen, with wakeful eyes,
Saw day point upward from the rosy skies.
She look'd to seaward; but the sea was void,
And scarce in ken the sailing ships descried.
Stung with despite, and furious with despair,
She struck her trembling breast, and tore her hair.
"And shall th' ungrateful traitor go," she said,
"My land forsaken, and my love betray'd?
Shall we not arm? not rush from ev'ry street,
To follow, sink, and burn his perjur'd fleet?
Haste, haul my galleys out! pursue the foe!
Bring flaming brands! set sail, and swiftly row!
What have I said? where am I? Fury turns
My brain; and my distemper'd bosom burns.
Then, when I gave my person and my throne,
This hate, this rage, had been more timely shown.
See now the promis'd faith, the vaunted name,
The pious man, who, rushing thro' the flame,
Preserv'd his gods, and to the Phrygian shore
The burthen of his feeble father bore!
I should have torn him piecemeal; strow'd in floods
His scatter'd limbs, or left expos'd in woods;
Destroy'd his friends and son; and, from the fire,
Have set the reeking boy before the sire.
Events are doubtful, which on battles wait:
Yet where's the doubt, to souls secure of fate?
My Tyrians, at their injur'd queen's command,
Had toss'd their fires amid the Trojan band;
At once extinguish'd all the faithless name;
And I myself, in vengeance of my shame,
Had fall'n upon the pile, to mend the fun'ral flame.
Thou Sun, who view'st at once the world below;
Thou Juno, guardian of the nuptial vow;
Thou Hecate hearken from thy dark abodes!
Ye Furies, fiends, and violated gods,
All pow'rs invok'd with Dido's dying breath,
Attend her curses and avenge her death!
If so the Fates ordain, Jove commands,
Th' ungrateful wretch should find the Latian lands,
Yet let a race untam'd, and haughty foes,
His peaceful entrance with dire arms oppose:
Oppress'd with numbers in th' unequal field,
His men discourag'd, and himself expell'd,
Let him for succor sue from place to place,
Torn from his subjects, and his son's embrace.
First, let him see his friends in battle slain,
And their untimely fate lament in vain;
And when, at length, the cruel war shall cease,
On hard conditions may he buy his peace:
Nor let him then enjoy supreme command;
But fall, untimely, by some hostile hand,
And lie unburied on the barren sand!
These are my pray'rs, and this my dying will;
And you, my Tyrians, ev'ry curse fulfil.
Perpetual hate and mortal wars proclaim,
Against the prince, the people, and the name.
These grateful off'rings on my grave bestow;
Nor league, nor love, the hostile nations know!
Now, and from hence, in ev'ry future age,
When rage excites your arms, and strength supplies the rage
Rise some avenger of our Libyan blood,
With fire and sword pursue the perjur'd brood;
Our arms, our seas, our shores, oppos'd to theirs;
And the same hate descend on all our heirs!"

This said, within her anxious mind she weighs
The means of cutting short her odious days.
Then to Sichaeus' nurse she briefly said
(For, when she left her country, hers was dead):
"Go, Barce, call my sister. Let her care
The solemn rites of sacrifice prepare;
The sheep, and all th' atoning off'rings bring,
Sprinkling her body from the crystal spring
With living drops; then let her come, and thou
With sacred fillets bind thy hoary brow.
Thus will I pay my vows to Stygian Jove,
And end the cares of my disastrous love;
Then cast the Trojan image on the fire,
And, as that burns, my passions shall expire."

The nurse moves onward, with officious care,
And all the speed her aged limbs can bear.
But furious Dido, with dark thoughts involv'd,
Shook at the mighty mischief she resolv'd.
With livid spots distinguish'd was her face;
Red were her rolling eyes, and discompos'd her pace;
Ghastly she gaz'd, with pain she drew her breath,
And nature shiver'd at approaching death.

Then swiftly to the fatal place she pass'd,
And mounts the fun'ral pile with furious haste;
Unsheathes the sword the Trojan left behind
(Not for so dire an enterprise design'd).
But when she view'd the garments loosely spread,
Which once he wore, and saw the conscious bed,
She paus'd, and with a sigh the robes embrac'd;
Then on the couch her trembling body cast,
Repress'd the ready tears, and spoke her last:
"Dear pledges of my love, while Heav'n so pleas'd,
Receive a soul, of mortal anguish eas'd:
My fatal course is finish'd; and I go,
A glorious name, among the ghosts below.
A lofty city by my hands is rais'd,
Pygmalion punish'd, and my lord appeas'd.
What could my fortune have afforded more,
Had the false Trojan never touch'd my shore!"
Then kiss'd the couch; and, "Must I die," she said,
"And unreveng'd? 'T is doubly to be dead!
Yet ev'n this death with pleasure I receive:
On any terms, 't is better than to live.
These flames, from far, may the false Trojan view;
These boding omens his base flight pursue!"

She said, and struck; deep enter'd in her side
The piercing steel, with reeking purple dyed:
Clogg'd in the wound the cruel weapon stands;
The spouting blood came streaming on her hands.
Her sad attendants saw the deadly stroke,
And with loud cries the sounding palace shook.
Distracted, from the fatal sight they fled,
And thro' the town the dismal rumor spread.
First from the frighted court the yell began;
Redoubled, thence from house to house it ran:
The groans of men, with shrieks, laments, and cries
Of mixing women, mount the vaulted skies.
Not less the clamor, than if- ancient Tyre,
Or the new Carthage, set by foes on fire-
The rolling ruin, with their lov'd abodes,
Involv'd the blazing temples of their gods.

Her sister hears; and, furious with despair,
She beats her breast, and rends her yellow hair,
And, calling on Eliza's name aloud,
Runs breathless to the place, and breaks the crowd.
"Was all that pomp of woe for this prepar'd;
These fires, this fun'ral pile, these altars rear'd?
Was all this train of plots contriv'd," said she,
"All only to deceive unhappy me?
Which is the worst? Didst thou in death pretend
To scorn thy sister, or delude thy friend?
Thy summon'd sister, and thy friend, had come;
One sword had serv'd us both, one common tomb:
Was I to raise the pile, the pow'rs invoke,
Not to be present at the fatal stroke?
At once thou hast destroy'd thyself and me,
Thy town, thy senate, and thy colony!
Bring water; bathe the wound; while I in death
Lay close my lips to hers, and catch the flying breath."
This said, she mounts the pile with eager haste,
And in her arms the gasping queen embrac'd;
Her temples chaf'd; and her own garments tore,
To stanch the streaming blood, and cleanse the gore.
Thrice Dido tried to raise her drooping head,
And, fainting thrice, fell grov'ling on the bed;
Thrice op'd her heavy eyes, and sought the light,
But, having found it, sicken'd at the sight,
And clos'd her lids at last in endless night.

Then Juno, grieving that she should sustain
A death so ling'ring, and so full of pain,
Sent Iris down, to free her from the strife
Of lab'ring nature, and dissolve her life.
For since she died, not doom'd by Heav'n's decree,
Or her own crime, but human casualty,
And rage of love, that plung'd her in despair,
The Sisters had not cut the topmost hair,
Which Proserpine and they can only know;
Nor made her sacred to the shades below.
Downward the various goddess took her flight,
And drew a thousand colors from the light;
Then stood above the dying lover's head,
And said: "I thus devote thee to the dead.
This off'ring to th' infernal gods I bear."
Thus while she spoke, she cut the fatal hair:
The struggling soul was loos'd, and life dissolv'd in air.





Meantime the Trojan cuts his wat'ry way,
Fix'd on his voyage, thro' the curling sea;
Then, casting back his eyes, with dire amaze,
Sees on the Punic shore the mounting blaze.
The cause unknown; yet his presaging mind
The fate of Dido from the fire divin'd;
He knew the stormy souls of womankind,
What secret springs their eager passions move,
How capable of death for injur'd love.
Dire auguries from hence the Trojans draw;
Till neither fires nor shining shores they saw.
Now seas and skies their prospect only bound;
An empty space above, a floating field around.
But soon the heav'ns with shadows were o'erspread;
A swelling cloud hung hov'ring o'er their head:
Livid it look'd, the threat'ning of a storm:
Then night and horror ocean's face deform.
The pilot, Palinurus, cried aloud:
"What gusts of weather from that gath'ring cloud
My thoughts presage! Ere yet the tempest roars,
Stand to your tackle, mates, and stretch your oars;
Contract your swelling sails, and luff to wind."
The frighted crew perform the task assign'd.
Then, to his fearless chief: "Not Heav'n," said he,
"Tho' Jove himself should promise Italy,
Can stem the torrent of this raging sea.
Mark how the shifting winds from west arise,
And what collected night involves the skies!
Nor can our shaken vessels live at sea,
Much less against the tempest force their way.
'T is fate diverts our course, and fate we must obey.
Not far from hence, if I observ'd aright
The southing of the stars, and polar light,
Sicilia lies, whose hospitable shores
In safety we may reach with struggling oars."
Aeneas then replied: "Too sure I find
We strive in vain against the seas and wind:
Now shift your sails; what place can please me more
Than what you promise, the Sicilian shore,
Whose hallow'd earth Anchises' bones contains,
And where a prince of Trojan lineage reigns?"
The course resolv'd, before the western wind
They scud amain, and make the port assign'd.
Meantime Acestes, from a lofty stand,
Beheld the fleet descending on the land;
And, not unmindful of his ancient race,
Down from the cliff he ran with eager pace,
And held the hero in a strict embrace.
Of a rough Libyan bear the spoils he wore,
And either hand a pointed jav'lin bore.
His mother was a dame of Dardan blood;
His sire Crinisus, a Sicilian flood.
He welcomes his returning friends ashore
With plenteous country cates and homely store.

Now, when the following morn had chas'd away
The flying stars, and light restor'd the day,
Aeneas call'd the Trojan troops around,
And thus bespoke them from a rising ground:
"Offspring of heav'n, divine Dardanian race!
The sun, revolving thro' th' ethereal space,
The shining circle of the year has fill'd,
Since first this isle my father's ashes held:
And now the rising day renews the year;
A day for ever sad, for ever dear.
This would I celebrate with annual games,
With gifts on altars pil'd, and holy flames,
Tho' banish'd to Gaetulia's barren sands,
Caught on the Grecian seas, or hostile lands:
But since this happy storm our fleet has driv'n
(Not, as I deem, without the will of Heav'n)
Upon these friendly shores and flow'ry plains,
Which hide Anchises and his blest remains,
Let us with joy perform his honors due,
And pray for prosp'rous winds, our voyage to renew;
Pray, that in towns and temples of our own,
The name of great Anchises may be known,
And yearly games may spread the gods' renown.
Our sports Acestes, of the Trojan race,
With royal gifts ordain'd, is pleas'd to grace:
Two steers on ev'ry ship the king bestows;
His gods and ours shall share your equal vows.
Besides, if, nine days hence, the rosy morn
Shall with unclouded light the skies adorn,
That day with solemn sports I mean to grace:
Light galleys on the seas shall run a wat'ry race;
Some shall in swiftness for the goal contend,
And others try the twanging bow to bend;
The strong, with iron gauntlets arm'd, shall stand
Oppos'd in combat on the yellow sand.
Let all be present at the games prepar'd,
And joyful victors wait the just reward.
But now assist the rites, with garlands crown'd."
He said, and first his brows with myrtle bound.
Then Helymus, by his example led,
And old Acestes, each adorn'd his head;
Thus young Ascanius, with a sprightly grace,
His temples tied, and all the Trojan race.
 Aeneas then advanc'd amidst the train,
By thousands follow'd thro' the flow'ry plain,
To great Anchises' tomb; which when he found,
He pour'd to Bacchus, on the hallow'd ground,
Two bowls of sparkling wine, of milk two more,
And two (from offer'd bulls) of purple gore,
With roses then the sepulcher he strow'd
And thus his father's ghost bespoke aloud:
"Hail, O ye holy manes! hail again,
Paternal ashes, now review'd in vain!
The gods permitted not, that you, with me,
Should reach the promis'd shores of Italy,
Or Tiber's flood, what flood soe'er it be."
Scarce had he finish'd, when, with speckled pride,
A serpent from the tomb began to glide;
His hugy bulk on sev'n high volumes roll'd;
Blue was his breadth of back, but streak'd with scaly gold:
Thus riding on his curls, he seem'd to pass
A rolling fire along, and singe the grass.
More various colors thro' his body run,
Than Iris when her bow imbibes the sun.
Betwixt the rising altars, and around,
The sacred monster shot along the ground;
With harmless play amidst the bowls he pass'd,
And with his lolling tongue assay'd the taste:
Thus fed with holy food, the wondrous guest
Within the hollow tomb retir'd to rest.
The pious prince, surpris'd at what he view'd,
The fun'ral honors with more zeal renew'd,
Doubtful if this place's genius were,
Or guardian of his father's sepulcher.
Five sheep, according to the rites, he slew;
As many swine, and steers of sable hue;
New gen'rous wine he from the goblets pour'd.
And call'd his father's ghost, from hell restor'd.
The glad attendants in long order come,
Off'ring their gifts at great Anchises' tomb:
Some add more oxen: some divide the spoil;
Some place the chargers on the grassy soil;
Some blow the fires, and offered entrails broil.

Now came the day desir'd. The skies were bright
With rosy luster of the rising light:
The bord'ring people, rous'd by sounding fame
Of Trojan feasts and great Acestes' name,
The crowded shore with acclamations fill,
Part to behold, and part to prove their skill.
And first the gifts in public view they place,
Green laurel wreaths, and palm, the victors' grace:
Within the circle, arms and tripods lie,
Ingots of gold and silver, heap'd on high,
And vests embroider'd, of the Tyrian dye.
The trumpet's clangor then the feast proclaims,
And all prepare for their appointed games.
Four galleys first, which equal rowers bear,
Advancing, in the wat'ry lists appear.
The speedy Dolphin, that outstrips the wind,
Bore Mnestheus, author of the Memmian kind:
Gyas the vast Chimaera's bulk commands,
Which rising, like a tow'ring city stands;
Three Trojans tug at ev'ry lab'ring oar;
Three banks in three degrees the sailors bore;
Beneath their sturdy strokes the billows roar.
Sergesthus, who began the Sergian race,
In the great Centaur took the leading place;
Cloanthus on the sea-green Scylla stood,
From whom Cluentius draws his Trojan blood.

Far in the sea, against the foaming shore,
There stands a rock: the raging billows roar
Above his head in storms; but, when 't is clear,
Uncurl their ridgy backs, and at his foot appear.
In peace below the gentle waters run;
The cormorants above lie basking in the sun.
On this the hero fix'd an oak in sight,
The mark to guide the mariners aright.
To bear with this, the seamen stretch their oars;
Then round the rock they steer, and seek the former shores.
The lots decide their place. Above the rest,
Each leader shining in his Tyrian vest;
The common crew with wreaths of poplar boughs
Their temples crown, and shade their sweaty brows:
Besmear'd with oil, their naked shoulders shine.
All take their seats, and wait the sounding sign:
They gripe their oars; and ev'ry panting breast
Is rais'd by turns with hope, by turns with fear depress'd.
The clangor of the trumpet gives the sign;
At once they start, advancing in a line:
With shouts the sailors rend the starry skies;
Lash'd with their oars, the smoky billows rise;
Sparkles the briny main, and the vex'd ocean fries.
Exact in time, with equal strokes they row:
At once the brushing oars and brazen prow
Dash up the sandy waves, and ope the depths below.
Not fiery coursers, in a chariot race,
Invade the field with half so swift a pace;
Not the fierce driver with more fury lends
The sounding lash, and, ere the stroke descends,
Low to the wheels his pliant body bends.
The partial crowd their hopes and fears divide,
And aid with eager shouts the favor'd side.
Cries, murmurs, clamors, with a mixing sound,
From woods to woods, from hills to hills rebound.

Amidst the loud applauses of the shore,
Gyas outstripp'd the rest, and sprung before:
Cloanthus, better mann'd, pursued him fast,
But his o'er-masted galley check'd his haste.
The Centaur and the Dolphin brush the brine
With equal oars, advancing in a line;
And now the mighty Centaur seems to lead,
And now the speedy Dolphin gets ahead;
Now board to board the rival vessels row,
The billows lave the skies, and ocean groans below.
They reach'd the mark. Proud Gyas and his train
In triumph rode, the victors of the main;
But, steering round, he charg'd his pilot stand
More close to shore, and skim along the sand-
"Let others bear to sea!" Menoetes heard;
But secret shelves too cautiously he fear'd,
And, fearing, sought the deep; and still aloof he steer'd.
With louder cries the captain call'd again:
"Bear to the rocky shore, and shun the main."
He spoke, and, speaking, at his stern he saw
The bold Cloanthus near the shelvings draw.
Betwixt the mark and him the Scylla stood,
And in a closer compass plow'd the flood.
He pass'd the mark; and, wheeling, got before:
Gyas blasphem'd the gods, devoutly swore,
Cried out for anger, and his hair he tore.
Mindless of others' lives (so high was grown
His rising rage) and careless of his own,
The trembling dotard to the deck he drew;
Then hoisted up, and overboard he threw:
This done, he seiz'd the helm; his fellows cheer'd,
Turn'd short upon the shelfs, and madly steer'd.

Hardly his head the plunging pilot rears,
Clogg'd with his clothes, and cumber'd with his years:
Now dropping wet, he climbs the cliff with pain.
The crowd, that saw him fall and float again,
Shout from the distant shore; and loudly laugh'd,
To see his heaving breast disgorge the briny draught.
The following Centaur, and the Dolphin's crew,
Their vanish'd hopes of victory renew;
While Gyas lags, they kindle in the race,
To reach the mark. Sergesthus takes the place;
Mnestheus pursues; and while around they wind,
Comes up, not half his galley's length behind;
Then, on the deck, amidst his mates appear'd,
And thus their drooping courage he cheer'd:
"My friends, and Hector's followers heretofore,
Exert your vigor; tug the lab'ring oar;
Stretch to your strokes, my still unconquer'd crew,
Whom from the flaming walls of Troy I drew.
In this, our common int'rest, let me find
That strength of hand, that courage of the mind,
As when you stemm'd the strong Malean flood,
And o'er the Syrtes' broken billows row'd.
I seek not now the foremost palm to gain;
Tho' yet- but, ah! that haughty wish is vain!
Let those enjoy it whom the gods ordain.
But to be last, the lags of all the race!-
Redeem yourselves and me from that disgrace."
Now, one and all, they tug amain; they row
At the full stretch, and shake the brazen prow.
The sea beneath 'em sinks; their lab'ring sides
Are swell'd, and sweat runs gutt'ring down in tides.
Chance aids their daring with unhop'd success;
Sergesthus, eager with his beak to press
Betwixt the rival galley and the rock,
Shuts up th' unwieldly Centaur in the lock.
The vessel struck; and, with the dreadful shock,
Her oars she shiver'd, and her head she broke.
The trembling rowers from their banks arise,
And, anxious for themselves, renounce the prize.
With iron poles they heave her off the shores,
And gather from the sea their floating oars.
The crew of Mnestheus, with elated minds,
Urge their success, and call the willing winds;
Then ply their oars, and cut their liquid way
In larger compass on the roomy sea.
As, when the dove her rocky hold forsakes,
Rous'd in a fright, her sounding wings she shakes;
The cavern rings with clatt'ring; out she flies,
And leaves her callow care, and cleaves the skies:
At first she flutters; but at length she springs
To smoother flight, and shoots upon her wings:
So Mnestheus in the Dolphin cuts the sea;
And, flying with a force, that force assists his way.
Sergesthus in the Centaur soon he pass'd,
Wedg'd in the rocky shoals, and sticking fast.
In vain the victor he with cries implores,
And practices to row with shatter'd oars.
Then Mnestheus bears with Gyas, and outflies:
The ship, without a pilot, yields the prize.
Unvanquish'd Scylla now alone remains;
Her he pursues, and all his vigor strains.
Shouts from the fav'ring multitude arise;
Applauding Echo to the shouts replies;
Shouts, wishes, and applause run rattling thro' the skies.
These clamors with disdain the Scylla heard,
Much grudg'd the praise, but more the robb'd reward:
Resolv'd to hold their own, they mend their pace,
All obstinate to die, or gain the race.
Rais'd with success, the Dolphin swiftly ran;
For they can conquer, who believe they can.
Both urge their oars, and fortune both supplies,
And both perhaps had shar'd an equal prize;
When to the seas Cloanthus holds his hands,
And succor from the wat'ry pow'rs demands:
"Gods of the liquid realms, on which I row!
If, giv'n by you, the laurel bind my brow,
Assist to make me guilty of my vow!
A snow-white bull shall on your shore be slain;
His offer'd entrails cast into the main,
And ruddy wine, from golden goblets thrown,
Your grateful gift and my return shall own."
The choir of nymphs, and Phorcus, from below,
With virgin Panopea, heard his vow;
And old Portunus, with his breadth of hand,
Push'd on, and sped the galley to the land.
Swift as a shaft, or winged wind, she flies,
And, darting to the port, obtains the prize.

The herald summons all, and then proclaims
Cloanthus conqu'ror of the naval games.
The prince with laurel crowns the victor's head,
And three fat steers are to his vessel led,
The ship's reward; with gen'rous wine beside,
And sums of silver, which the crew divide.
The leaders are distinguish'd from the rest;
The victor honor'd with a nobler vest,
Where gold and purple strive in equal rows,
And needlework its happy cost bestows.
There Ganymede is wrought with living art,
Chasing thro' Ida's groves the trembling hart:
Breathless he seems, yet eager to pursue;
When from aloft descends, in open view,
The bird of Jove, and, sousing on his prey,
With crooked talons bears the boy away.
In vain, with lifted hands and gazing eyes,
His guards behold him soaring thro' the skies,
And dogs pursue his flight with imitated cries.

Mnestheus the second victor was declar'd;
And, summon'd there, the second prize he shard.
A coat of mail, brave Demoleus bore,
More brave Aeneas from his shoulders tore,
In single combat on the Trojan shore:
This was ordain'd for Mnestheus to possess;
In war for his defense, for ornament in peace.
Rich was the gift, and glorious to behold,
But yet so pond'rous with its plates of gold,
That scarce two servants could the weight sustain;
Yet, loaded thus, Demoleus o'er the plain
Pursued and lightly seiz'd the Trojan train.
The third, succeeding to the last reward,
Two goodly bowls of massy silver shar'd,
With figures prominent, and richly wrought,
And two brass caldrons from Dodona brought.

Thus all, rewarded by the hero's hands,
Their conqu'ring temples bound with purple bands;
And now Sergesthus, clearing from the rock,
Brought back his galley shatter'd with the shock.
Forlorn she look'd, without an aiding oar,
And, houted by the vulgar, made to shore.
As when a snake, surpris'd upon the road,
Is crush'd athwart her body by the load
Of heavy wheels; or with a mortal wound
Her belly bruis'd, and trodden to the ground:
In vain, with loosen'd curls, she crawls along;
Yet, fierce above, she brandishes her tongue;
Glares with her eyes, and bristles with her scales;
But, groveling in the dust, her parts unsound she trails:
So slowly to the port the Centaur tends,
But, what she wants in oars, with sails amends.
Yet, for his galley sav'd, the grateful prince
Is pleas'd th' unhappy chief to recompense.
Pholoe, the Cretan slave, rewards his care,
Beauteous herself, with lovely twins as fair.

From thence his way the Trojan hero bent
Into the neighb'ring plain, with mountains pent,
Whose sides were shaded with surrounding wood.
Full in the midst of this fair valley stood
A native theater, which, rising slow
By just degrees, o'erlook'd the ground below.
High on a sylvan throne the leader sate;
A num'rous train attend in solemn state.
Here those that in the rapid course delight,
Desire of honor and the prize invite.
The rival runners without order stand;
The Trojans mix'd with the Sicilian band.
First Nisus, with Euryalus, appears;
Euryalus a boy of blooming years,
With sprightly grace and equal beauty crown'd;
Nisus, for friendship to the youth renown'd.
Diores next, of Priam's royal race,
Then Salius joined with Patron, took their place;
(But Patron in Arcadia had his birth,
And Salius his from Arcananian earth;)
Then two Sicilian youths- the names of these,
Swift Helymus, and lovely Panopes:
Both jolly huntsmen, both in forest bred,
And owning old Acestes for their head;
With sev'ral others of ignobler name,
Whom time has not deliver'd o'er to fame.

To these the hero thus his thoughts explain'd,
In words which gen'ral approbation gain'd:
"One common largess is for all design'd,
(The vanquish'd and the victor shall be join'd,)
Two darts of polish'd steel and Gnosian wood,
A silver-studded ax, alike bestow'd.
The foremost three have olive wreaths decreed:
The first of these obtains a stately steed,
Adorn'd with trappings; and the next in fame,
The quiver of an Amazonian dame,
With feather'd Thracian arrows well supplied:
A golden belt shall gird his manly side,
Which with a sparkling diamond shall be tied.
The third this Grecian helmet shall content."
He said. To their appointed base they went;
With beating hearts th' expected sign receive,
And, starting all at once, the barrier leave.
Spread out, as on the winged winds, they flew,
And seiz'd the distant goal with greedy view.
Shot from the crowd, swift Nisus all o'erpass'd;
Nor storms, nor thunder, equal half his haste.
The next, but tho' the next, yet far disjoin'd,
Came Salius, and Euryalus behind;
Then Helymus, whom young Diores plied,
Step after step, and almost side by side,
His shoulders pressing; and, in longer space,
Had won, or left at least a dubious race.

Now, spent, the goal they almost reach at last,
When eager Nisus, hapless in his haste,
Slipp'd first, and, slipping, fell upon the plain,
Soak'd with the blood of oxen newly slain.
The careless victor had not mark'd his way;
But, treading where the treach'rous puddle lay,
His heels flew up; and on the grassy floor
He fell, besmear'd with filth and holy gore.
Not mindless then, Euryalus, of thee,
Nor of the sacred bonds of amity,
He strove th' immediate rival's hope to cross,
And caught the foot of Salius as he rose.
So Salius lay extended on the plain;
Euryalus springs out, the prize to gain,
And leaves the crowd: applauding peals attend
The victor to the goal, who vanquish'd by his friend.
Next Helymus; and then Diores came,
By two misfortunes made the third in fame.

But Salius enters, and, exclaiming loud
For justice, deafens and disturbs the crowd;
Urges his cause may in the court be heard;
And pleads the prize is wrongfully conferr'd.
But favor for Euryalus appears;
His blooming beauty, with his tender tears,
Had brib'd the judges for the promis'd prize.
Besides, Diores fills the court with cries,
Who vainly reaches at the last reward,
If the first palm on Salius be conferr'd.
Then thus the prince: "Let no disputes arise:
Where fortune plac'd it, I award the prize.
But fortune's errors give me leave to mend,
At least to pity my deserving friend."
He said, and, from among the spoils, he draws
(Pond'rous with shaggy mane and golden paws)
A lion's hide: to Salius this he gives.
Nisus with envy sees the gift, and grieves.
"If such rewards to vanquish'd men are due."
He said, "and falling is to rise by you,
What prize may Nisus from your bounty claim,
Who merited the first rewards and fame?
In falling, both an equal fortune tried;
Would fortune for my fall so well provide!"
With this he pointed to his face, and show'd
His hand and all his habit smear'd with blood.
Th' indulgent father of the people smil'd,
And caus'd to be produc'd an ample shield,
Of wondrous art, by Didymaon wrought,
Long since from Neptune's bars in triumph brought.
This giv'n to Nisus, he divides the rest,
And equal justice in his gifts express'd.

The race thus ended, and rewards bestow'd,
Once more the prince bespeaks th' attentive crowd:
"If there he here whose dauntless courage dare
In gauntlet-fight, with limbs and body bare,
His opposite sustain in open view,
Stand forth the champion, and the games renew.
Two prizes I propose, and thus divide:
A bull with gilded horns, and fillets tied,
Shall be the portion of the conqu'ring chief;
A sword and helm shall cheer the loser's grief."

Then haughty Dares in the lists appears;
Stalking he strides, his head erected bears:
His nervous arms the weighty gauntlet wield,
And loud applauses echo thro' the field.
Dares alone in combat us'd to stand
The match of mighty Paris, hand to hand;
The same, at Hector's fun'rals, undertook
Gigantic Butes, of th' Amycian stock,
And, by the stroke of his resistless hand,
Stretch'd the vast bulk upon the yellow sand.
Such Dares was; and such he strode along,
And drew the wonder of the gazing throng.
His brawny back and ample breast he shows,
His lifted arms around his head he throws,
And deals in whistling air his empty blows.
His match is sought; but, thro' the trembling band,
Not one dares answer to the proud demand.
Presuming of his force, with sparkling eyes
Already he devours the promis'd prize.
He claims the bull with awless insolence,
And having seiz'd his horns, accosts the prince:
"If none my matchless valor dares oppose,
How long shall Dares wait his dastard foes?
Permit me, chief, permit without delay,
To lead this uncontended gift away."
The crowd assents, and with redoubled cries
For the proud challenger demands the prize.

Acestes, fir'd with just disdain, to see
The palm usurp'd without a victory,
Reproach'd Entellus thus, who sate beside,
And heard and saw, unmov'd, the Trojan's pride:
"Once, but in vain, a champion of renown,
So tamely can you bear the ravish'd crown,
A prize in triumph borne before your sight,
And shun, for fear, the danger of the fight?
Where is our Eryx now, the boasted name,
The god who taught your thund'ring arm the game?
Where now your baffled honor? Where the spoil
That fill'd your house, and fame that fill'd our isle?"
Entellus, thus: "My soul is still the same,
Unmov'd with fear, and mov'd with martial fame;
But my chill blood is curdled in my veins,
And scarce the shadow of a man remains.
O could I turn to that fair prime again,
That prime of which this boaster is so vain,
The brave, who this decrepid age defies,
Should feel my force, without the promis'd prize."

He said; and, rising at the word, he threw
Two pond'rous gauntlets down in open view;
Gauntlets which Eryx wont in fight to wield,
And sheathe his hands with in the listed field.
With fear and wonder seiz'd, the crowd beholds
The gloves of death, with sev'n distinguish'd folds
Of tough bull hides; the space within is spread
With iron, or with loads of heavy lead:
Dares himself was daunted at the sight,
Renounc'd his challenge, and refus'd to fight.
Astonish'd at their weight, the hero stands,
And pois'd the pond'rous engines in his hands.
"What had your wonder," said Entellus, "been,
Had you the gauntlets of Alcides seen,
Or view'd the stern debate on this unhappy green!
These which I bear your brother Eryx bore,
Still mark'd with batter'd brains and mingled gore.
With these he long sustain'd th' Herculean arm;
And these I wielded while my blood was warm,
This languish'd frame while better spirits fed,
Ere age unstrung my nerves, or time o'ersnow'd my head.
But if the challenger these arms refuse,
And cannot wield their weight, or dare not use;
If great Aeneas and Acestes join
In his request, these gauntlets I resign;
Let us with equal arms perform the fight,
And let him leave to fear, since I resign my right."

This said, Entellus for the strife prepares;
Stripp'd of his quilted coat, his body bares;
Compos'd of mighty bones and brawn he stands,
A goodly tow'ring object on the sands.
Then just Aeneas equal arms supplied,
Which round their shoulders to their wrists they tied.
Both on the tiptoe stand, at full extent,
Their arms aloft, their bodies inly bent;
Their heads from aiming blows they bear afar;
With clashing gauntlets then provoke the war.
One on his youth and pliant limbs relies;
One on his sinews and his giant size.
The last is stiff with age, his motion slow;
He heaves for breath, he staggers to and fro,
And clouds of issuing smoke his nostrils loudly blow.
Yet equal in success, they ward, they strike;
Their ways are diff'rent, but their art alike.
Before, behind, the blows are dealt; around
Their hollow sides the rattling thumps resound.
A storm of strokes, well meant, with fury flies,
And errs about their temples, ears, and eyes.
Nor always errs; for oft the gauntlet draws
A sweeping stroke along the crackling jaws.
Heavy with age, Entellus stands his ground,
But with his warping body wards the wound.
His hand and watchful eye keep even pace;
While Dares traverses and shifts his place,
And, like a captain who beleaguers round
Some strong-built castle on a rising ground,
Views all th' approaches with observing eyes:
This and that other part in vain he tries,
And more on industry than force relies.
With hands on high, Entellus threats the foe;
But Dares watch'd the motion from below,
And slipp'd aside, and shunn'd the long descending blow.
Entellus wastes his forces on the wind,
And, thus deluded of the stroke design'd,
Headlong and heavy fell; his ample breast
And weighty limbs his ancient mother press'd.
So falls a hollow pine, that long had stood
On Ida's height, or Erymanthus' wood,
Torn from the roots. The diff'ring nations rise,
And shouts and mingled murmurs rend the skies,
Acestus runs with eager haste, to raise
The fall'n companion of his youthful days.
Dauntless he rose, and to the fight return'd;
With shame his glowing cheeks, his eyes with fury burn'd.
Disdain and conscious virtue fir'd his breast,
And with redoubled force his foe he press'd.
He lays on load with either hand, amain,
And headlong drives the Trojan o'er the plain;
Nor stops, nor stays; nor rest nor breath allows;
But storms of strokes descend about his brows,
A rattling tempest, and a hail of blows.
But now the prince, who saw the wild increase
Of wounds, commands the combatants to cease,
And bounds Entellus' wrath, and bids the peace.
First to the Trojan, spent with toil, he came,
And sooth'd his sorrow for the suffer'd shame.
"What fury seiz'd my friend? The gods," said he,
"To him propitious, and averse to thee,
Have giv'n his arm superior force to thine.
'T is madness to contend with strength divine."
The gauntlet fight thus ended, from the shore
His faithful friends unhappy Dares bore:
His mouth and nostrils pour'd a purple flood,
And pounded teeth came rushing with his blood.
Faintly he stagger'd thro' the hissing throng,
And hung his head, and trail'd his legs along.
The sword and casque are carried by his train;
But with his foe the palm and ox remain.

The champion, then, before Aeneas came,
Proud of his prize, but prouder of his fame:
"O goddess-born, and you, Dardanian host,
Mark with attention, and forgive my boast;
Learn what I was, by what remains; and know
From what impending fate you sav'd my foe."
Sternly he spoke, and then confronts the bull;
And, on his ample forehead aiming full,
The deadly stroke, descending, pierc'd the skull.
Down drops the beast, nor needs a second wound,
But sprawls in pangs of death, and spurns the ground.
Then, thus: "In Dares' stead I offer this.
Eryx, accept a nobler sacrifice;
Take the last gift my wither'd arms can yield:
Thy gauntlets I resign, and here renounce the field."

This done, Aeneas orders, for the close,
The strife of archers with contending bows.
The mast Sergesthus' shatter'd galley bore
With his own hands he raises on the shore.
A flutt'ring dove upon the top they tie,
The living mark at which their arrows fly.
The rival archers in a line advance,
Their turn of shooting to receive from chance.
A helmet holds their names; the lots are drawn:
On the first scroll was read Hippocoon.
The people shout. Upon the next was found
Young Mnestheus, late with naval honors crown'd.
The third contain'd Eurytion's noble name,
Thy brother, Pandarus, and next in fame,
Whom Pallas urg'd the treaty to confound,
And send among the Greeks a feather'd wound.
Acestes in the bottom last remain'd,
Whom not his age from youthful sports restrain'd.
Soon all with vigor bend their trusty bows,
And from the quiver each his arrow chose.
Hippocoon's was the first: with forceful sway
It flew, and, whizzing, cut the liquid way.
Fix'd in the mast the feather'd weapon stands:
The fearful pigeon flutters in her bands,
And the tree trembled, and the shouting cries
Of the pleas'd people rend the vaulted skies.
Then Mnestheus to the head his arrow drove,
With lifted eyes, and took his aim above,
But made a glancing shot, and missed the dove;
Yet miss'd so narrow, that he cut the cord
Which fasten'd by the foot the flitting bird.
The captive thus releas'd, away she flies,
And beats with clapping wings the yielding skies.
His bow already bent, Eurytion stood;
And, having first invok'd his brother god,
His winged shaft with eager haste he sped.
The fatal message reach'd her as she fled:
She leaves her life aloft; she strikes the ground,
And renders back the weapon in the wound.
Acestes, grudging at his lot, remains,
Without a prize to gratify his pains.
Yet, shooting upward, sends his shaft, to show
An archer's art, and boast his twanging bow.
The feather'd arrow gave a dire portent,
And latter augurs judge from this event.
Chaf'd by the speed, it fir'd; and, as it flew,
A trail of following flames ascending drew:
Kindling they mount, and mark the shiny way;
Across the skies as falling meteors play,
And vanish into wind, or in a blaze decay.
The Trojans and Sicilians wildly stare,
And, trembling, turn their wonder into pray'r.
The Dardan prince put on a smiling face,
And strain'd Acestes with a close embrace;
Then, hon'ring him with gifts above the rest,
Turn'd the bad omen, nor his fears confess'd.
"The gods," said he, "this miracle have wrought,
And order'd you the prize without the lot.
Accept this goblet, rough with figur'd gold,
Which Thracian Cisseus gave my sire of old:
This pledge of ancient amity receive,
Which to my second sire I justly give."
He said, and, with the trumpets' cheerful sound,
Proclaim'd him victor, and with laurel-crown'd.
Nor good Eurytion envied him the prize,
Tho' he transfix'd the pigeon in the skies.
Who cut the line, with second gifts was grac'd;
The third was his whose arrow pierc'd the mast.

The chief, before the games were wholly done,
Call'd Periphantes, tutor to his son,
And whisper'd thus: "With speed Ascanius find;
And, if his childish troop be ready join'd,
On horseback let him grace his grandsire's day,
And lead his equals arm'd in just array."
He said; and, calling out, the cirque he clears.
The crowd withdrawn, an open plain appears.
And now the noble youths, of form divine,
Advance before their fathers, in a line;
The riders grace the steeds; the steeds with glory shine.

Thus marching on in military pride,
Shouts of applause resound from side to side.
Their casques adorn'd with laurel wreaths they wear,
Each brandishing aloft a cornel spear.
Some at their backs their gilded quivers bore;
Their chains of burnish'd gold hung down before.
Three graceful troops they form'd upon the green;
Three graceful leaders at their head were seen;
Twelve follow'd ev'ry chief, and left a space between.
The first young Priam led; a lovely boy,
Whose grandsire was th' unhappy king of Troy;
His race in after times was known to fame,
New honors adding to the Latian name;
And well the royal boy his Thracian steed became.
White were the fetlocks of his feet before,
And on his front a snowy star he bore.
Then beauteous Atys, with Iulus bred,
Of equal age, the second squadron led.
The last in order, but the first in place,
First in the lovely features of his face,
Rode fair Ascanius on a fiery steed,
Queen Dido's gift, and of the Tyrian breed.
Sure coursers for the rest the king ordains,
With golden bits adorn'd, and purple reins.

The pleas'd spectators peals of shouts renew,
And all the parents in the children view;
Their make, their motions, and their sprightly grace,
And hopes and fears alternate in their face.

Th' unfledg'd commanders and their martial train
First make the circuit of the sandy plain
Around their sires, and, at th' appointed sign,
Drawn up in beauteous order, form a line.
The second signal sounds, the troop divides
In three distinguish'd parts, with three distinguish'd guides
Again they close, and once again disjoin;
In troop to troop oppos'd, and line to line.
They meet; they wheel; they throw their darts afar
With harmless rage and well-dissembled war.
Then in a round the mingled bodies run:
Flying they follow, and pursuing shun;
Broken, they break; and, rallying, they renew
In other forms the military shew.
At last, in order, undiscern'd they join,
And march together in a friendly line.
And, as the Cretan labyrinth of old,
With wand'ring ways and many a winding fold,
Involv'd the weary feet, without redress,
In a round error, which denied recess;
So fought the Trojan boys in warlike play,
Turn'd and return'd, and still a diff'rent way.
Thus dolphins in the deep each other chase
In circles, when they swim around the wat'ry race.
This game, these carousels, Ascanius taught;
And, building Alba, to the Latins brought;
Shew'd what he learn'd: the Latin sires impart
To their succeeding sons the graceful art;
From these imperial Rome receiv'd the game,
Which Troy, the youths the Trojan troop, they name.

Thus far the sacred sports they celebrate:
But Fortune soon resum'd her ancient hate;
For, while they pay the dead his annual dues,
Those envied rites Saturnian Juno views;
And sends the goddess of the various bow,
To try new methods of revenge below;
Supplies the winds to wing her airy way,
Where in the port secure the navy lay.
Swiftly fair Iris down her arch descends,
And, undiscern'd, her fatal voyage ends.
She saw the gath'ring crowd; and, gliding thence,
The desart shore, and fleet without defense.
The Trojan matrons, on the sands alone,
With sighs and tears Anchises' death bemoan;
Then, turning to the sea their weeping eyes,
Their pity to themselves renews their cries.
"Alas!" said one, "what oceans yet remain
For us to sail! what labors to sustain!"
All take the word, and, with a gen'ral groan,
Implore the gods for peace, and places of their own.

The goddess, great in mischief, views their pains,
And in a woman's form her heav'nly limbs restrains.
In face and shape old Beroe she became,
Doryclus' wife, a venerable dame,
Once blest with riches, and a mother's name.
Thus chang'd, amidst the crying crowd she ran,
Mix'd with the matrons, and these words began:
"O wretched we, whom not the Grecian pow'r,
Nor flames, destroy'd, in Troy's unhappy hour!
O wretched we, reserv'd by cruel fate,
Beyond the ruins of the sinking state!
Now sev'n revolving years are wholly run,
Since this improsp'rous voyage we begun;
Since, toss'd from shores to shores, from lands to lands,
Inhospitable rocks and barren sands,
Wand'ring in exile thro' the stormy sea,
We search in vain for flying Italy.
Now cast by fortune on this kindred land,
What should our rest and rising walls withstand,
Or hinder here to fix our banish'd band?
O country lost, and gods redeem'd in vain,
If still in endless exile we remain!
Shall we no more the Trojan walls renew,
Or streams of some dissembled Simois view!
Haste, join with me, th' unhappy fleet consume!
Cassandra bids; and I declare her doom.
In sleep I saw her; she supplied my hands
(For this I more than dreamt) with flaming brands:
'With these,' said she, 'these wand'ring ships destroy:
These are your fatal seats, and this your Troy.'
Time calls you now; the precious hour employ:
Slack not the good presage, while Heav'n inspires
Our minds to dare, and gives the ready fires.
See! Neptune's altars minister their brands:
The god is pleas'd; the god supplies our hands."
Then from the pile a flaming fire she drew,
And, toss'd in air, amidst the galleys threw.

Wrapp'd in amaze, the matrons wildly stare:
Then Pyrgo, reverenc'd for her hoary hair,
Pyrgo, the nurse of Priam's num'rous race:
"No Beroe this, tho' she belies her face!
What terrors from her frowning front arise!
Behold a goddess in her ardent eyes!
What rays around her heav'nly face are seen!
Mark her majestic voice, and more than mortal mien!
Beroe but now I left, whom, pin'd with pain,
Her age and anguish from these rites detain,"
She said. The matrons, seiz'd with new amaze,
Roll their malignant eyes, and on the navy gaze.
They fear, and hope, and neither part obey:
They hope the fated land, but fear the fatal way.
The goddess, having done her task below,
Mounts up on equal wings, and bends her painted bow.
Struck with the sight, and seiz'd with rage divine,
The matrons prosecute their mad design:
They shriek aloud; they snatch, with impious hands,
The food of altars; fires and flaming brands.
Green boughs and saplings, mingled in their haste,
And smoking torches, on the ships they cast.
The flame, unstopp'd at first, more fury gains,
And Vulcan rides at large with loosen'd reins:
Triumphant to the painted sterns he soars,
And seizes, in this way, the banks and crackling oars.
Eumelus was the first the news to bear,
While yet they crowd the rural theater.
Then, what they hear, is witness'd by their eyes:
A storm of sparkles and of flames arise.
Ascanius took th' alarm, while yet he led
His early warriors on his prancing steed,
And, spurring on, his equals soon o'erpass'd;
Nor could his frighted friends reclaim his haste.
Soon as the royal youth appear'd in view,
He sent his voice before him as he flew:
"What madness moves you, matrons, to destroy
The last remainders of unhappy Troy!
Not hostile fleets, but your own hopes, you burn,
And on your friends your fatal fury turn.
Behold your own Ascanius!" While he said,
He drew his glitt'ring helmet from his head,
In which the youths to sportful arms he led.
By this, Aeneas and his train appear;
And now the women, seiz'd with shame and fear,
Dispers'd, to woods and caverns take their flight,
Abhor their actions, and avoid the light;
Their friends acknowledge, and their error find,
And shake the goddess from their alter'd mind.

Not so the raging fires their fury cease,
But, lurking in the seams, with seeming peace,
Work on their way amid the smold'ring tow,
Sure in destruction, but in motion slow.
The silent plague thro' the green timber eats,
And vomits out a tardy flame by fits.
Down to the keels, and upward to the sails,
The fire descends, or mounts, but still prevails;
Nor buckets pour'd, nor strength of human hand,
Can the victorious element withstand.

The pious hero rends his robe, and throws
To heav'n his hands, and with his hands his vows.
"O Jove," he cried, "if pray'rs can yet have place;
If thou abhorr'st not all the Dardan race;
If any spark of pity still remain;
If gods are gods, and not invok'd in vain;
Yet spare the relics of the Trojan train!
Yet from the flames our burning vessels free,
Or let thy fury fall alone on me!
At this devoted head thy thunder throw,
And send the willing sacrifice below!"

Scarce had he said, when southern storms arise:
From pole to pole the forky lightning flies;
Loud rattling shakes the mountains and the plain;
Heav'n bellies downward, and descends in rain.
Whole sheets of water from the clouds are sent,
Which, hissing thro' the planks, the flames prevent,
And stop the fiery pest. Four ships alone
Burn to the waist, and for the fleet atone.

But doubtful thoughts the hero's heart divide;
If he should still in Sicily reside,
Forgetful of his fates, or tempt the main,
In hope the promis'd Italy to gain.
Then Nautes, old and wise, to whom alone
The will of Heav'n by Pallas was foreshown;
Vers'd in portents, experienc'd, and inspir'd
To tell events, and what the fates requir'd;
Thus while he stood, to neither part inclin'd,
With cheerful words reliev'd his lab'ring mind:
"O goddess-born, resign'd in ev'ry state,
With patience bear, with prudence push your fate.
By suff'ring well, our Fortune we subdue;
Fly when she frowns, and, when she calls, pursue.
Your friend Acestes is of Trojan kind;
To him disclose the secrets of your mind:
Trust in his hands your old and useless train;
Too num'rous for the ships which yet remain:
The feeble, old, indulgent of their ease,
The dames who dread the dangers of the seas,
With all the dastard crew, who dare not stand
The shock of battle with your foes by land.
Here you may build a common town for all,
And, from Acestes' name, Acesta call."
The reasons, with his friend's experience join'd,
Encourag'd much, but more disturb'd his mind.

'T was dead of night; when to his slumb'ring eyes
His father's shade descended from the skies,
And thus he spoke: "O more than vital breath,
Lov'd while I liv'd, and dear ev'n after death;
O son, in various toils and troubles toss'd,
The King of Heav'n employs my careful ghost
On his commands: the god, who sav'd from fire
Your flaming fleet, and heard your just desire.
The wholesome counsel of your friend receive,
And here the coward train and woman leave:
The chosen youth, and those who nobly dare,
Transport, to tempt the dangers of the war.
The stern Italians will their courage try;
Rough are their manners, and their minds are high.
But first to Pluto's palace you shall go,
And seek my shade among the blest below:
For not with impious ghosts my soul remains,
Nor suffers with the damn'd perpetual pains,
But breathes the living air of soft Elysian plains.
The chaste Sibylla shall your steps convey,
And blood of offer'd victims free the way.
There shall you know what realms the gods assign,
And learn the fates and fortunes of your line.
But now, farewell! I vanish with the night,
And feel the blast of heav'n's approaching light."
He said, and mix'd with shades, and took his airy flight.
"Whither so fast?" the filial duty cried;
"And why, ah why, the wish'd embrace denied?"

He said, and rose; as holy zeal inspires,
He rakes hot embers, and renews the fires;
His country gods and Vesta then adores
With cakes and incense, and their aid implores.
Next, for his friends and royal host he sent,
Reveal'd his vision, and the gods' intent,
With his own purpose. All, without delay,
The will of Jove, and his desires obey.
They list with women each degenerate name,
Who dares not hazard life for future fame.
These they cashier: the brave remaining few,
Oars, banks, and cables, half consum'd, renew.
The prince designs a city with the plow;
The lots their sev'ral tenements allow.
This part is nam'd from Ilium, that from Troy,
And the new king ascends the throne with joy;
A chosen senate from the people draws;
Appoints the judges, and ordains the laws.
Then, on the top of Eryx, they begin
A rising temple to the Paphian queen.
Anchises, last, is honor'd as a god;
A priest is added, annual gifts bestow'd,
And groves are planted round his blest abode.
Nine days they pass in feasts, their temples crown'd;
And fumes of incense in the fanes abound.
Then from the south arose a gentle breeze
That curl'd the smoothness of the glassy seas;
The rising winds a ruffling gale afford,
And call the merry mariners aboard.

Now loud laments along the shores resound,
Of parting friends in close embraces bound.
The trembling women, the degenerate train,
Who shunn'd the frightful dangers of the main,
Ev'n those desire to sail, and take their share
Of the rough passage and the promis'd war:
Whom good Aeneas cheers, and recommends
To their new master's care his fearful friends.
On Eryx's altars three fat calves he lays;
A lamb new-fallen to the stormy seas;
Then slips his haulsers, and his anchors weighs.
High on the deck the godlike hero stands,
With olive crown'd, a charger in his hands;
Then cast the reeking entrails in the brine,
And pour'd the sacrifice of purple wine.
Fresh gales arise; with equal strokes they vie,
And brush the buxom seas, and o'er the billows fly.

Meantime the mother goddess, full of fears,
To Neptune thus address'd, with tender tears:
"The pride of Jove's imperious queen, the rage,
The malice which no suff'rings can assuage,
Compel me to these pray'rs; since neither fate,
Nor time, nor pity, can remove her hate:
Ev'n Jove is thwarted by his haughty wife;
Still vanquish'd, yet she still renews the strife.
As if 't were little to consume the town
Which aw'd the world, and wore th' imperial crown,
She prosecutes the ghost of Troy with pains,
And gnaws, ev'n to the bones, the last remains.
Let her the causes of her hatred tell;
But you can witness its effects too well.
You saw the storm she rais'd on Libyan floods,
That mix'd the mounting billows with the clouds;
When, bribing Aeolus, she shook the main,
And mov'd rebellion in your wat'ry reign.
With fury she possess'd the Dardan dames,
To burn their fleet with execrable flames,
And forc'd Aeneas, when his ships were lost,
To leave his foll'wers on a foreign coast.
For what remains, your godhead I implore,
And trust my son to your protecting pow'r.
If neither Jove's nor Fate's decree withstand,
Secure his passage to the Latian land."

Then thus the mighty Ruler of the Main:
"What may not Venus hope from Neptune's reign?
My kingdom claims your birth; my late defense
Of your indanger'd fleet may claim your confidence.
Nor less by land than sea my deeds declare
How much your lov'd Aeneas is my care.
Thee, Xanthus, and thee, Simois, I attest.
Your Trojan troops when proud Achilles press'd,
And drove before him headlong on the plain,
And dash'd against the walls the trembling train;
When floods were fill'd with bodies of the slain;
When crimson Xanthus, doubtful of his way,
Stood up on ridges to behold the sea;
(New heaps came tumbling in, and chok'd his way;)
When your Aeneas fought, but fought with odds
Of force unequal, and unequal gods;
I spread a cloud before the victor's sight,
Sustain'd the vanquish'd, and secur'd his flight;
Ev'n then secur'd him, when I sought with joy
The vow'd destruction of ungrateful Troy.
My will's the same: fair goddess, fear no more,
Your fleet shall safely gain the Latian shore;
Their lives are giv'n; one destin'd head alone
Shall perish, and for multitudes atone."
Thus having arm'd with hopes her anxious mind,
His finny team Saturnian Neptune join'd,
Then adds the foamy bridle to their jaws,
And to the loosen'd reins permits the laws.
High on the waves his azure car he guides;
Its axles thunder, and the sea subsides,
And the smooth ocean rolls her silent tides.
The tempests fly before their father's face,
Trains of inferior gods his triumph grace,
And monster whales before their master play,
And choirs of Tritons crowd the wat'ry way.
The marshal'd pow'rs in equal troops divide
To right and left; the gods his better side
Inclose, and on the worse the Nymphs and Nereids ride.

Now smiling hope, with sweet vicissitude,
Within the hero's mind his joys renew'd.
He calls to raise the masts, the sheets display;
The cheerful crew with diligence obey;
They scud before the wind, and sail in open sea.
Ahead of all the master pilot steers;
And, as he leads, the following navy veers.
The steeds of Night had travel'd half the sky,
The drowsy rowers on their benches lie,
When the soft God of Sleep, with easy flight,
Descends, and draws behind a trail of light.
Thou, Palinurus, art his destin'd prey;
To thee alone he takes his fatal way.
Dire dreams to thee, and iron sleep, he bears;
And, lighting on thy prow, the form of Phorbas wears.
Then thus the traitor god began his tale:
"The winds, my friend, inspire a pleasing gale;
The ships, without thy care, securely sail.
Now steal an hour of sweet repose; and I
Will take the rudder and thy room supply."
To whom the yawning pilot, half asleep:
"Me dost thou bid to trust the treach'rous deep,
The harlot smiles of her dissembling face,
And to her faith commit the Trojan race?
Shall I believe the Siren South again,
And, oft betray'd, not know the monster main?"
He said: his fasten'd hands the rudder keep,
And, fix'd on heav'n, his eyes repel invading sleep.
The god was wroth, and at his temples threw
A branch in Lethe dipp'd, and drunk with Stygian dew:
The pilot, vanquish'd by the pow'r divine,
Soon clos'd his swimming eyes, and lay supine.
Scarce were his limbs extended at their length,
The god, insulting with superior strength,
Fell heavy on him, plung'd him in the sea,
And, with the stern, the rudder tore away.
Headlong he fell, and, struggling in the main,
Cried out for helping hands, but cried in vain.
The victor daemon mounts obscure in air,
While the ship sails without the pilot's care.
On Neptune's faith the floating fleet relies;
But what the man forsook, the god supplies,
And o'er the dang'rous deep secure the navy flies;
Glides by the Sirens' cliffs, a shelfy coast,
Long infamous for ships and sailors lost,
And white with bones. Th' impetuous ocean roars,
And rocks rebellow from the sounding shores.
The watchful hero felt the knocks, and found
The tossing vessel sail'd on shoaly ground.
Sure of his pilot's loss, he takes himself
The helm, and steers aloof, and shuns the shelf.
Inly he griev'd, and, groaning from the breast,
Deplor'd his death; and thus his pain express'd:
"For faith repos'd on seas, and on the flatt'ring sky,
Thy naked corpse is doom'd on shores unknown to lie."





He said, and wept; then spread his sails before
The winds, and reach'd at length the Cumaean shore:
Their anchors dropp'd, his crew the vessels moor.
They turn their heads to sea, their sterns to land,
And greet with greedy joy th' Italian strand.
Some strike from clashing flints their fiery seed;
Some gather sticks, the kindled flames to feed,
Or search for hollow trees, and fell the woods,
Or trace thro' valleys the discover'd floods.
Thus, while their sev'ral charges they fulfil,
The pious prince ascends the sacred hill
Where Phoebus is ador'd; and seeks the shade
Which hides from sight his venerable maid.
Deep in a cave the Sibyl makes abode;
Thence full of fate returns, and of the god.
Thro' Trivia's grove they walk; and now behold,
And enter now, the temple roof'd with gold.
When Daedalus, to fly the Cretan shore,
His heavy limbs on jointed pinions bore,
(The first who sail'd in air,) 't is sung by Fame,
To the Cumaean coast at length he came,
And here alighting, built this costly frame.
Inscrib'd to Phoebus, here he hung on high
The steerage of his wings, that cut the sky:
Then o'er the lofty gate his art emboss'd
Androgeos' death, and off'rings to his ghost;
Sev'n youths from Athens yearly sent, to meet
The fate appointed by revengeful Crete.
And next to those the dreadful urn was plac'd,
In which the destin'd names by lots were cast:
The mournful parents stand around in tears,
And rising Crete against their shore appears.
There too, in living sculpture, might be seen
The mad affection of the Cretan queen;
Then how she cheats her bellowing lover's eye;
The rushing leap, the doubtful progeny,
The lower part a beast, a man above,
The monument of their polluted love.
Not far from thence he grav'd the wondrous maze,
A thousand doors, a thousand winding ways:
Here dwells the monster, hid from human view,
Not to be found, but by the faithful clew;
Till the kind artist, mov'd with pious grief,
Lent to the loving maid this last relief,
And all those erring paths describ'd so well
That Theseus conquer'd and the monster fell.
Here hapless Icarus had found his part,
Had not the father's grief restrain'd his art.
He twice assay'd to cast his son in gold;
Twice from his hands he dropp'd the forming mold.

All this with wond'ring eyes Aeneas view'd;
Each varying object his delight renew'd:
Eager to read the rest- Achates came,
And by his side the mad divining dame,
The priestess of the god, Deiphobe her name.
"Time suffers not," she said, "to feed your eyes
With empty pleasures; haste the sacrifice.
Sev'n bullocks, yet unyok'd, for Phoebus choose,
And for Diana sev'n unspotted ewes."
This said, the servants urge the sacred rites,
While to the temple she the prince invites.
A spacious cave, within its farmost part,
Was hew'd and fashion'd by laborious art
Thro' the hill's hollow sides: before the place,
A hundred doors a hundred entries grace;
As many voices issue, and the sound
Of Sybil's words as many times rebound.
Now to the mouth they come. Aloud she cries:
"This is the time; enquire your destinies.
He comes; behold the god!" Thus while she said,
(And shiv'ring at the sacred entry stay'd,)
Her color chang'd; her face was not the same,
And hollow groans from her deep spirit came.
Her hair stood up; convulsive rage possess'd
Her trembling limbs, and heav'd her lab'ring breast.
Greater than humankind she seem'd to look,
And with an accent more than mortal spoke.
Her staring eyes with sparkling fury roll;
When all the god came rushing on her soul.
Swiftly she turn'd, and, foaming as she spoke:
"Why this delay?" she cried- "the pow'rs invoke!
Thy pray'rs alone can open this abode;
Else vain are my demands, and dumb the god."

She said no more. The trembling Trojans hear,
O'erspread with a damp sweat and holy fear.
The prince himself, with awful dread possess'd,
His vows to great Apollo thus address'd:
"Indulgent god, propitious pow'r to Troy,
Swift to relieve, unwilling to destroy,
Directed by whose hand the Dardan dart
Pierc'd the proud Grecian's only mortal part:
Thus far, by fate's decrees and thy commands,
Thro' ambient seas and thro' devouring sands,
Our exil'd crew has sought th' Ausonian ground;
And now, at length, the flying coast is found.
Thus far the fate of Troy, from place to place,
With fury has pursued her wand'ring race.
Here cease, ye pow'rs, and let your vengeance end:
Troy is no more, and can no more offend.
And thou, O sacred maid, inspir'd to see
Th' event of things in dark futurity;
Give me what Heav'n has promis'd to my fate,
To conquer and command the Latian state;
To fix my wand'ring gods, and find a place
For the long exiles of the Trojan race.
Then shall my grateful hands a temple rear
To the twin gods, with vows and solemn pray'r;
And annual rites, and festivals, and games,
Shall be perform'd to their auspicious names.
Nor shalt thou want thy honors in my land;
For there thy faithful oracles shall stand,
Preserv'd in shrines; and ev'ry sacred lay,
Which, by thy mouth, Apollo shall convey:
All shall be treasur'd by a chosen train
Of holy priests, and ever shall remain.
But O! commit not thy prophetic mind
To flitting leaves, the sport of ev'ry wind,
Lest they disperse in air our empty fate;
Write not, but, what the pow'rs ordain, relate."

Struggling in vain, impatient of her load,
And lab'ring underneath the pond'rous god,
The more she strove to shake him from her breast,
With more and far superior force he press'd;
Commands his entrance, and, without control,
Usurps her organs and inspires her soul.
Now, with a furious blast, the hundred doors
Ope of themselves; a rushing whirlwind roars
Within the cave, and Sibyl's voice restores:
"Escap'd the dangers of the wat'ry reign,
Yet more and greater ills by land remain.
The coast, so long desir'd (nor doubt th' event),
Thy troops shall reach, but, having reach'd, repent.
Wars, horrid wars, I view- a field of blood,
And Tiber rolling with a purple flood.
Simois nor Xanthus shall be wanting there:
A new Achilles shall in arms appear,
And he, too, goddess-born. Fierce Juno's hate,
Added to hostile force, shall urge thy fate.
To what strange nations shalt not thou resort,
Driv'n to solicit aid at ev'ry court!
The cause the same which Ilium once oppress'd;
A foreign mistress, and a foreign guest.
But thou, secure of soul, unbent with woes,
The more thy fortune frowns, the more oppose.
The dawnings of thy safety shall be shown
From whence thou least shalt hope, a Grecian town."

Thus, from the dark recess, the Sibyl spoke,
And the resisting air the thunder broke;
The cave rebellow'd, and the temple shook.
Th' ambiguous god, who rul'd her lab'ring breast,
In these mysterious words his mind express'd;
Some truths reveal'd, in terms involv'd the rest.
At length her fury fell, her foaming ceas'd,
And, ebbing in her soul, the god decreas'd.
Then thus the chief: "No terror to my view,
No frightful face of danger can be new.
Inur'd to suffer, and resolv'd to dare,
The Fates, without my pow'r, shall be without my care.
This let me crave, since near your grove the road
To hell lies open, and the dark abode
Which Acheron surrounds, th' innavigable flood;
Conduct me thro' the regions void of light,
And lead me longing to my father's sight.
For him, a thousand dangers I have sought,
And, rushing where the thickest Grecians fought,
Safe on my back the sacred burthen brought.
He, for my sake, the raging ocean tried,
And wrath of Heav'n, my still auspicious guide,
And bore beyond the strength decrepid age supplied.
Oft, since he breath'd his last, in dead of night
His reverend image stood before my sight;
Enjoin'd to seek, below, his holy shade;
Conducted there by your unerring aid.
But you, if pious minds by pray'rs are won,
Oblige the father, and protect the son.
Yours is the pow'r; nor Proserpine in vain
Has made you priestess of her nightly reign.
If Orpheus, arm'd with his enchanting lyre,
The ruthless king with pity could inspire,
And from the shades below redeem his wife;
If Pollux, off'ring his alternate life,
Could free his brother, and can daily go
By turns aloft, by turns descend below-
Why name I Theseus, or his greater friend,
Who trod the downward path, and upward could ascend?
Not less than theirs from Jove my lineage came;
My mother greater, my descent the same."
So pray'd the Trojan prince, and, while he pray'd,
His hand upon the holy altar laid.

Then thus replied the prophetess divine:
"O goddess-born of great Anchises' line,
The gates of hell are open night and day;
Smooth the descent, and easy is the way:
But to return, and view the cheerful skies,
In this the task and mighty labor lies.
To few great Jupiter imparts this grace,
And those of shining worth and heav'nly race.
Betwixt those regions and our upper light,
Deep forests and impenetrable night
Possess the middle space: th' infernal bounds
Cocytus, with his sable waves, surrounds.
But if so dire a love your soul invades,
As twice below to view the trembling shades;
If you so hard a toil will undertake,
As twice to pass th' innavigable lake;
Receive my counsel. In the neighb'ring grove
There stands a tree; the queen of Stygian Jove
Claims it her own; thick woods and gloomy night
Conceal the happy plant from human sight.
One bough it bears; but (wondrous to behold!)
The ductile rind and leaves of radiant gold:
This from the vulgar branches must be torn,
And to fair Proserpine the present borne,
Ere leave be giv'n to tempt the nether skies.
The first thus rent a second will arise,
And the same metal the same room supplies.
Look round the wood, with lifted eyes, to see
The lurking gold upon the fatal tree:
Then rend it off, as holy rites command;
The willing metal will obey thy hand,
Following with ease, if favor'd by thy fate,
Thou art foredoom'd to view the Stygian state:
If not, no labor can the tree constrain;
And strength of stubborn arms and steel are vain.
Besides, you know not, while you here attend,
Th' unworthy fate of your unhappy friend:
Breathless he lies; and his unburied ghost,
Depriv'd of fun'ral rites, pollutes your host.
Pay first his pious dues; and, for the dead,
Two sable sheep around his hearse be led;
Then, living turfs upon his body lay:
This done, securely take the destin'd way,
To find the regions destitute of day."

She said, and held her peace. Aeneas went
Sad from the cave, and full of discontent,
Unknowing whom the sacred Sibyl meant.
Achates, the companion of his breast,
Goes grieving by his side, with equal cares oppress'd.
Walking, they talk'd, and fruitlessly divin'd
What friend the priestess by those words design'd.
But soon they found an object to deplore:
Misenus lay extended on the shore;
Son of the God of Winds: none so renown'd
The warrior trumpet in the field to sound;
With breathing brass to kindle fierce alarms,
And rouse to dare their fate in honorable arms.
He serv'd great Hector, and was ever near,
Not with his trumpet only, but his spear.
But by Pelides' arms when Hector fell,
He chose Aeneas; and he chose as well.
Swoln with applause, and aiming still at more,
He now provokes the sea gods from the shore;
With envy Triton heard the martial sound,
And the bold champion, for his challenge, drown'd;
Then cast his mangled carcass on the strand:
The gazing crowd around the body stand.
All weep; but most Aeneas mourns his fate,
And hastens to perform the funeral state.
In altar-wise, a stately pile they rear;
The basis broad below, and top advanc'd in air.
An ancient wood, fit for the work design'd,
(The shady covert of the salvage kind,)
The Trojans found: the sounding ax is plied;
Firs, pines, and pitch trees, and the tow'ring pride
Of forest ashes, feel the fatal stroke,
And piercing wedges cleave the stubborn oak.
Huge trunks of trees, fell'd from the steepy crown
Of the bare mountains, roll with ruin down.
Arm'd like the rest the Trojan prince appears,
And by his pious labor urges theirs.

Thus while he wrought, revolving in his mind
The ways to compass what his wish design'd,
He cast his eyes upon the gloomy grove,
And then with vows implor'd the Queen of Love:
"O may thy pow'r, propitious still to me,
Conduct my steps to find the fatal tree,
In this deep forest; since the Sibyl's breath
Foretold, alas! too true, Misenus' death."
Scarce had he said, when, full before his sight,
Two doves, descending from their airy flight,
Secure upon the grassy plain alight.
He knew his mother's birds; and thus he pray'd:
"Be you my guides, with your auspicious aid,
And lead my footsteps, till the branch be found,
Whose glitt'ring shadow gilds the sacred ground.
And thou, great parent, with celestial care,
In this distress be present to my pray'r!"
Thus having said, he stopp'd with watchful sight,
Observing still the motions of their flight,
What course they took, what happy signs they shew.
They fed, and, flutt'ring, by degrees withdrew
Still farther from the place, but still in view:
Hopping and flying, thus they led him on
To the slow lake, whose baleful stench to shun
They wing'd their flight aloft; then, stooping low,
Perch'd on the double tree that bears the golden bough.
Thro' the green leafs the glitt'ring shadows glow;
As, on the sacred oak, the wintry mistletoe,
Where the proud mother views her precious brood,
And happier branches, which she never sow'd.
Such was the glitt'ring; such the ruddy rind,
And dancing leaves, that wanton'd in the wind.
He seiz'd the shining bough with griping hold,
And rent away, with ease, the ling'ring gold;
Then to the Sibyl's palace bore the prize.
Meantime the Trojan troops, with weeping eyes,
To dead Misenus pay his obsequies.
First, from the ground a lofty pile they rear,
Of pitch trees, oaks, and pines, and unctuous fir:
The fabric's front with cypress twigs they strew,
And stick the sides with boughs of baleful yew.
The topmost part his glitt'ring arms adorn;
Warm waters, then, in brazen caldrons borne,
Are pour'd to wash his body, joint by joint,
And fragrant oils the stiffen'd limbs anoint.
With groans and cries Misenus they deplore:
Then on a bier, with purple cover'd o'er,
The breathless body, thus bewail'd, they lay,
And fire the pile, their faces turn'd away-
Such reverend rites their fathers us'd to pay.
Pure oil and incense on the fire they throw,
And fat of victims, which his friends bestow.
These gifts the greedy flames to dust devour;
Then on the living coals red wine they pour;
And, last, the relics by themselves dispose,
Which in a brazen urn the priests inclose.
Old Corynaeus compass'd thrice the crew,
And dipp'd an olive branch in holy dew;
Which thrice he sprinkled round, and thrice aloud
Invok'd the dead, and then dismissed the crowd.
But good Aeneas order'd on the shore
A stately tomb, whose top a trumpet bore,
A soldier's fauchion, and a seaman's oar.
Thus was his friend interr'd; and deathless fame
Still to the lofty cape consigns his name.
These rites perform'd, the prince, without delay,
Hastes to the nether world his destin'd way.
Deep was the cave; and, downward as it went
From the wide mouth, a rocky rough descent;
And here th' access a gloomy grove defends,
And there th' unnavigable lake extends,
O'er whose unhappy waters, void of light,
No bird presumes to steer his airy flight;
Such deadly stenches from the depths arise,
And steaming sulphur, that infects the skies.
From hence the Grecian bards their legends make,
And give the name Avernus to the lake.
Four sable bullocks, in the yoke untaught,
For sacrifice the pious hero brought.
The priestess pours the wine betwixt their horns;
Then cuts the curling hair; that first oblation burns,
Invoking Hecate hither to repair:
A pow'rful name in hell and upper air.
The sacred priests with ready knives bereave
The beasts of life, and in full bowls receive
The streaming blood: a lamb to Hell and Night
(The sable wool without a streak of white)
Aeneas offers; and, by fate's decree,
A barren heifer, Proserpine, to thee,
With holocausts he Pluto's altar fills;
Sev'n brawny bulls with his own hand he kills;
Then on the broiling entrails oil he pours;
Which, ointed thus, the raging flame devours.
Late the nocturnal sacrifice begun,
Nor ended till the next returning sun.
Then earth began to bellow, trees to dance,
And howling dogs in glimm'ring light advance,
Ere Hecate came. "Far hence be souls profane!"
The Sibyl cried, "and from the grove abstain!
Now, Trojan, take the way thy fates afford;
Assume thy courage, and unsheathe thy sword."
She said, and pass'd along the gloomy space;
The prince pursued her steps with equal pace.

Ye realms, yet unreveal'd to human sight,
Ye gods who rule the regions of the night,
Ye gliding ghosts, permit me to relate
The mystic wonders of your silent state!

Obscure they went thro' dreary shades, that led
Along the waste dominions of the dead.
Thus wander travelers in woods by night,
By the moon's doubtful and malignant light,
When Jove in dusky clouds involves the skies,
And the faint crescent shoots by fits before their eyes.

Just in the gate and in the jaws of hell,
Revengeful Cares and sullen Sorrows dwell,
And pale Diseases, and repining Age,
Want, Fear, and Famine's unresisted rage;
Here Toils, and Death, and Death's half-brother, Sleep,
Forms terrible to view, their sentry keep;
With anxious Pleasures of a guilty mind,
Deep Frauds before, and open Force behind;
The Furies' iron beds; and Strife, that shakes
Her hissing tresses and unfolds her snakes.
Full in the midst of this infernal road,
An elm displays her dusky arms abroad:
The God of Sleep there hides his heavy head,
And empty dreams on ev'ry leaf are spread.
Of various forms unnumber'd specters more,
Centaurs, and double shapes, besiege the door.
Before the passage, horrid Hydra stands,
And Briareus with all his hundred hands;
Gorgons, Geryon with his triple frame;
And vain Chimaera vomits empty flame.
The chief unsheath'd his shining steel, prepar'd,
Tho' seiz'd with sudden fear, to force the guard,
Off'ring his brandish'd weapon at their face;
Had not the Sibyl stopp'd his eager pace,
And told him what those empty phantoms were:
Forms without bodies, and impassive air.
Hence to deep Acheron they take their way,
Whose troubled eddies, thick with ooze and clay,
Are whirl'd aloft, and in Cocytus lost.
There Charon stands, who rules the dreary coast-
A sordid god: down from his hoary chin
A length of beard descends, uncomb'd, unclean;
His eyes, like hollow furnaces on fire;
A girdle, foul with grease, binds his obscene attire.
He spreads his canvas; with his pole he steers;
The freights of flitting ghosts in his thin bottom bears.
He look'd in years; yet in his years were seen
A youthful vigor and autumnal green.
An airy crowd came rushing where he stood,
Which fill'd the margin of the fatal flood:
Husbands and wives, boys and unmarried maids,
And mighty heroes' more majestic shades,
And youths, intomb'd before their fathers' eyes,
With hollow groans, and shrieks, and feeble cries.
Thick as the leaves in autumn strow the woods,
Or fowls, by winter forc'd, forsake the floods,
And wing their hasty flight to happier lands;
Such, and so thick, the shiv'ring army stands,
And press for passage with extended hands.
Now these, now those, the surly boatman bore:
The rest he drove to distance from the shore.
The hero, who beheld with wond'ring eyes
The tumult mix'd with shrieks, laments, and cries,
Ask'd of his guide, what the rude concourse meant;
Why to the shore the thronging people bent;
What forms of law among the ghosts were us'd;
Why some were ferried o'er, and some refus'd.

"Son of Anchises, offspring of the gods,"
The Sibyl said, "you see the Stygian floods,
The sacred stream which heav'n's imperial state
Attests in oaths, and fears to violate.
The ghosts rejected are th' unhappy crew
Depriv'd of sepulchers and fun'ral due:
The boatman, Charon; those, the buried host,
He ferries over to the farther coast;
Nor dares his transport vessel cross the waves
With such whose bones are not compos'd in graves.
A hundred years they wander on the shore;
At length, their penance done, are wafted o'er."
The Trojan chief his forward pace repress'd,
Revolving anxious thoughts within his breast,
He saw his friends, who, whelm'd beneath the waves,
Their fun'ral honors claim'd, and ask'd their quiet graves.
The lost Leucaspis in the crowd he knew,
And the brave leader of the Lycian crew,
Whom, on the Tyrrhene seas, the tempests met;
The sailors master'd, and the ship o'erset.

Amidst the spirits, Palinurus press'd,
Yet fresh from life, a new-admitted guest,
Who, while he steering view'd the stars, and bore
His course from Afric to the Latian shore,
Fell headlong down. The Trojan fix'd his view,
And scarcely thro' the gloom the sullen shadow knew.
Then thus the prince: "What envious pow'r, O friend,
Brought your lov'd life to this disastrous end?
For Phoebus, ever true in all he said,
Has in your fate alone my faith betray'd.
The god foretold you should not die, before
You reach'd, secure from seas, th' Italian shore.
Is this th' unerring pow'r?" The ghost replied;
"Nor Phoebus flatter'd, nor his answers lied;
Nor envious gods have sent me to the deep:
But, while the stars and course of heav'n I keep,
My wearied eyes were seiz'd with fatal sleep.
I fell; and, with my weight, the helm constrain'd
Was drawn along, which yet my gripe retain'd.
Now by the winds and raging waves I swear,
Your safety, more than mine, was then my care;
Lest, of the guide bereft, the rudder lost,
Your ship should run against the rocky coast.
Three blust'ring nights, borne by the southern blast,
I floated, and discover'd land at last:
High on a mounting wave my head I bore,
Forcing my strength, and gath'ring to the shore.
Panting, but past the danger, now I seiz'd
The craggy cliffs, and my tir'd members eas'd.
While, cumber'd with my dropping clothes, I lay,
The cruel nation, covetous of prey,
Stain'd with my blood th' unhospitable coast;
And now, by winds and waves, my lifeless limbs are toss'd:
Which O avert, by yon ethereal light,
Which I have lost for this eternal night!
Or, if by dearer ties you may be won,
By your dead sire, and by your living son,
Redeem from this reproach my wand'ring ghost;
Or with your navy seek the Velin coast,
And in a peaceful grave my corpse compose;
Or, if a nearer way your mother shows,
Without whose aid you durst not undertake
This frightful passage o'er the Stygian lake,
Lend to this wretch your hand, and waft him o'er
To the sweet banks of yon forbidden shore."
Scarce had he said, the prophetess began:
"What hopes delude thee, miserable man?
Think'st thou, thus unintomb'd, to cross the floods,
To view the Furies and infernal gods,
And visit, without leave, the dark abodes?
Attend the term of long revolving years;
Fate, and the dooming gods, are deaf to tears.
This comfort of thy dire misfortune take:
The wrath of Heav'n, inflicted for thy sake,
With vengeance shall pursue th' inhuman coast,
Till they propitiate thy offended ghost,
And raise a tomb, with vows and solemn pray'r;
And Palinurus' name the place shall bear."
This calm'd his cares; sooth'd with his future fame,
And pleas'd to hear his propagated name.

Now nearer to the Stygian lake they draw:
Whom, from the shore, the surly boatman saw;
Observ'd their passage thro' the shady wood,
And mark'd their near approaches to the flood.
Then thus he call'd aloud, inflam'd with wrath:
"Mortal, whate'er, who this forbidden path
In arms presum'st to tread, I charge thee, stand,
And tell thy name, and bus'ness in the land.
Know this, the realm of night- the Stygian shore:
My boat conveys no living bodies o'er;
Nor was I pleas'd great Theseus once to bear,
Who forc'd a passage with his pointed spear,
Nor strong Alcides- men of mighty fame,
And from th' immortal gods their lineage came.
In fetters one the barking porter tied,
And took him trembling from his sov'reign's side:
Two sought by force to seize his beauteous bride."
To whom the Sibyl thus: "Compose thy mind;
Nor frauds are here contriv'd, nor force design'd.
Still may the dog the wand'ring troops constrain
Of airy ghosts, and vex the guilty train,
And with her grisly lord his lovely queen remain.
The Trojan chief, whose lineage is from Jove,
Much fam'd for arms, and more for filial love,
Is sent to seek his sire in your Elysian grove.
If neither piety, nor Heav'n's command,
Can gain his passage to the Stygian strand,
This fatal present shall prevail at least."
Then shew'd the shining bough, conceal'd within her vest.
No more was needful: for the gloomy god
Stood mute with awe, to see the golden rod;
Admir'd the destin'd off'ring to his queen-
A venerable gift, so rarely seen.
His fury thus appeas'd, he puts to land;
The ghosts forsake their seats at his command:
He clears the deck, receives the mighty freight;
The leaky vessel groans beneath the weight.
Slowly she sails, and scarcely stems the tides;
The pressing water pours within her sides.
His passengers at length are wafted o'er,
Expos'd, in muddy weeds, upon the miry shore.

No sooner landed, in his den they found
The triple porter of the Stygian sound,
Grim Cerberus, who soon began to rear
His crested snakes, and arm'd his bristling hair.
The prudent Sibyl had before prepar'd
A sop, in honey steep'd, to charm the guard;
Which, mix'd with pow'rful drugs, she cast before
His greedy grinning jaws, just op'd to roar.
With three enormous mouths he gapes; and straight,
With hunger press'd, devours the pleasing bait.
Long draughts of sleep his monstrous limbs enslave;
He reels, and, falling, fills the spacious cave.
The keeper charm'd, the chief without delay
Pass'd on, and took th' irremeable way.
Before the gates, the cries of babes new born,
Whom fate had from their tender mothers torn,
Assault his ears: then those, whom form of laws
Condemn'd to die, when traitors judg'd their cause.
Nor want they lots, nor judges to review
The wrongful sentence, and award a new.
Minos, the strict inquisitor, appears;
And lives and crimes, with his assessors, hears.
Round in his urn the blended balls he rolls,
Absolves the just, and dooms the guilty souls.
The next, in place and punishment, are they
Who prodigally throw their souls away;
Fools, who, repining at their wretched state,
And loathing anxious life, suborn'd their fate.
With late repentance now they would retrieve
The bodies they forsook, and wish to live;
Their pains and poverty desire to bear,
To view the light of heav'n, and breathe the vital air:
But fate forbids; the Stygian floods oppose,
And with circling streams the captive souls inclose.

Not far from thence, the Mournful Fields appear
So call'd from lovers that inhabit there.
The souls whom that unhappy flame invades,
In secret solitude and myrtle shades
Make endless moans, and, pining with desire,
Lament too late their unextinguish'd fire.
Here Procris, Eriphyle here he found,
Baring her breast, yet bleeding with the wound
Made by her son. He saw Pasiphae there,
With Phaedra's ghost, a foul incestuous pair.
There Laodamia, with Evadne, moves,
Unhappy both, but loyal in their loves:
Caeneus, a woman once, and once a man,
But ending in the sex she first began.
Not far from these Phoenician Dido stood,
Fresh from her wound, her bosom bath'd in blood;
Whom when the Trojan hero hardly knew,
Obscure in shades, and with a doubtful view,
(Doubtful as he who sees, thro' dusky night,
Or thinks he sees, the moon's uncertain light,)
With tears he first approach'd the sullen shade;
And, as his love inspir'd him, thus he said:
"Unhappy queen! then is the common breath
Of rumor true, in your reported death,
And I, alas! the cause? By Heav'n, I vow,
And all the pow'rs that rule the realms below,
Unwilling I forsook your friendly state,
Commanded by the gods, and forc'd by fate-
Those gods, that fate, whose unresisted might
Have sent me to these regions void of light,
Thro' the vast empire of eternal night.
Nor dar'd I to presume, that, press'd with grief,
My flight should urge you to this dire relief.
Stay, stay your steps, and listen to my vows:
'T is the last interview that fate allows!"
In vain he thus attempts her mind to move
With tears, and pray'rs, and late-repenting love.
Disdainfully she look'd; then turning round,
But fix'd her eyes unmov'd upon the ground,
And what he says and swears, regards no more
Than the deaf rocks, when the loud billows roar;
But whirl'd away, to shun his hateful sight,
Hid in the forest and the shades of night;
Then sought Sichaeus thro' the shady grove,
Who answer'd all her cares, and equal'd all her love.

Some pious tears the pitying hero paid,
And follow'd with his eyes the flitting shade,
Then took the forward way, by fate ordain'd,
And, with his guide, the farther fields attain'd,
Where, sever'd from the rest, the warrior souls remain'd.
Tydeus he met, with Meleager's race,
The pride of armies, and the soldiers' grace;
And pale Adrastus with his ghastly face.
Of Trojan chiefs he view'd a num'rous train,
All much lamented, all in battle slain;
Glaucus and Medon, high above the rest,
Antenor's sons, and Ceres' sacred priest.
And proud Idaeus, Priam's charioteer,
Who shakes his empty reins, and aims his airy spear.
The gladsome ghosts, in circling troops, attend
And with unwearied eyes behold their friend;
Delight to hover near, and long to know
What bus'ness brought him to the realms below.
But Argive chiefs, and Agamemnon's train,
When his refulgent arms flash'd thro' the shady plain,
Fled from his well-known face, with wonted fear,
As when his thund'ring sword and pointed spear
Drove headlong to their ships, and glean'd the routed rear.
They rais'd a feeble cry, with trembling notes;
But the weak voice deceiv'd their gasping throats.

Here Priam's son, Deiphobus, he found,
Whose face and limbs were one continued wound:
Dishonest, with lopp'd arms, the youth appears,
Spoil'd of his nose, and shorten'd of his ears.
He scarcely knew him, striving to disown
His blotted form, and blushing to be known;
And therefore first began: "O Teucer's race,
Who durst thy faultless figure thus deface?
What heart could wish, what hand inflict, this dire disgrace?
'Twas fam'd, that in our last and fatal night
Your single prowess long sustain'd the fight,
Till tir'd, not forc'd, a glorious fate you chose,
And fell upon a heap of slaughter'd foes.
But, in remembrance of so brave a deed,
A tomb and fun'ral honors I decreed;
Thrice call'd your manes on the Trojan plains:
The place your armor and your name retains.
Your body too I sought, and, had I found,
Design'd for burial in your native ground."

The ghost replied: "Your piety has paid
All needful rites, to rest my wand'ring shade;
But cruel fate, and my more cruel wife,
To Grecian swords betray'd my sleeping life.
These are the monuments of Helen's love:
The shame I bear below, the marks I bore above.
You know in what deluding joys we pass'd
The night that was by Heav'n decreed our last:
For, when the fatal horse, descending down,
Pregnant with arms, o'erwhelm'd th' unhappy town
She feign'd nocturnal orgies; left my bed,
And, mix'd with Trojan dames, the dances led
Then, waving high her torch, the signal made,
Which rous'd the Grecians from their ambuscade.
With watching overworn, with cares oppress'd,
Unhappy I had laid me down to rest,
And heavy sleep my weary limbs possess'd.
Meantime my worthy wife our arms mislaid,
And from beneath my head my sword convey'd;
The door unlatch'd, and, with repeated calls,
Invites her former lord within my walls.
Thus in her crime her confidence she plac'd,
And with new treasons would redeem the past.
What need I more? Into the room they ran,
And meanly murther'd a defenseless man.
Ulysses, basely born, first led the way.
Avenging pow'rs! with justice if I pray,
That fortune be their own another day!
But answer you; and in your turn relate,
What brought you, living, to the Stygian state:
Driv'n by the winds and errors of the sea,
Or did you Heav'n's superior doom obey?
Or tell what other chance conducts your way,
To view with mortal eyes our dark retreats,
Tumults and torments of th' infernal seats."

While thus in talk the flying hours they pass,
The sun had finish'd more than half his race:
And they, perhaps, in words and tears had spent
The little time of stay which Heav'n had lent;
But thus the Sibyl chides their long delay:
"Night rushes down, and headlong drives the day:
'T is here, in different paths, the way divides;
The right to Pluto's golden palace guides;
The left to that unhappy region tends,
Which to the depth of Tartarus descends;
The seat of night profound, and punish'd fiends."
Then thus Deiphobus: "O sacred maid,
Forbear to chide, and be your will obey'd!
Lo! to the secret shadows I retire,
To pay my penance till my years expire.
Proceed, auspicious prince, with glory crown'd,
And born to better fates than I have found."
He said; and, while he said, his steps he turn'd
To secret shadows, and in silence mourn'd.

The hero, looking on the left, espied
A lofty tow'r, and strong on ev'ry side
With treble walls, which Phlegethon surrounds,
Whose fiery flood the burning empire bounds;
And, press'd betwixt the rocks, the bellowing noise resounds
Wide is the fronting gate, and, rais'd on high
With adamantine columns, threats the sky.
Vain is the force of man, and Heav'n's as vain,
To crush the pillars which the pile sustain.
Sublime on these a tow'r of steel is rear'd;
And dire Tisiphone there keeps the ward,
Girt in her sanguine gown, by night and day,
Observant of the souls that pass the downward way.
From hence are heard the groans of ghosts, the pains
Of sounding lashes and of dragging chains.
The Trojan stood astonish'd at their cries,
And ask'd his guide from whence those yells arise;
And what the crimes, and what the tortures were,
And loud laments that rent the liquid air.

She thus replied: "The chaste and holy race
Are all forbidden this polluted place.
But Hecate, when she gave to rule the woods,
Then led me trembling thro' these dire abodes,
And taught the tortures of th' avenging gods.
These are the realms of unrelenting fate;
And awful Rhadamanthus rules the state.
He hears and judges each committed crime;
Enquires into the manner, place, and time.
The conscious wretch must all his acts reveal,
(Loth to confess, unable to conceal),
From the first moment of his vital breath,
To his last hour of unrepenting death.
Straight, o'er the guilty ghost, the Fury shakes
The sounding whip and brandishes her snakes,
And the pale sinner, with her sisters, takes.
Then, of itself, unfolds th' eternal door;
With dreadful sounds the brazen hinges roar.
You see, before the gate, what stalking ghost
Commands the guard, what sentries keep the post.
More formidable Hydra stands within,
Whose jaws with iron teeth severely grin.
The gaping gulf low to the center lies,
And twice as deep as earth is distant from the skies.
The rivals of the gods, the Titan race,
Here, sing'd with lightning, roll within th' unfathom'd space.
Here lie th' Alaean twins, (I saw them both,)
Enormous bodies, of gigantic growth,
Who dar'd in fight the Thund'rer to defy,
Affect his heav'n, and force him from the sky.
Salmoneus, suff'ring cruel pains, I found,
For emulating Jove; the rattling sound
Of mimic thunder, and the glitt'ring blaze
Of pointed lightnings, and their forky rays.
Thro' Elis and the Grecian towns he flew;
Th' audacious wretch four fiery coursers drew:
He wav'd a torch aloft, and, madly vain,
Sought godlike worship from a servile train.
Ambitious fool! with horny hoofs to pass
O'er hollow arches of resounding brass,
To rival thunder in its rapid course,
And imitate inimitable force!
But he, the King of Heav'n, obscure on high,
Bar'd his red arm, and, launching from the sky
His writhen bolt, not shaking empty smoke,
Down to the deep abyss the flaming felon strook.
There Tityus was to see, who took his birth
From heav'n, his nursing from the foodful earth.
Here his gigantic limbs, with large embrace,
Infold nine acres of infernal space.
A rav'nous vulture, in his open'd side,
Her crooked beak and cruel talons tried;
Still for the growing liver digg'd his breast;
The growing liver still supplied the feast;
Still are his entrails fruitful to their pains:
Th' immortal hunger lasts, th' immortal food remains.
Ixion and Perithous I could name,
And more Thessalian chiefs of mighty fame.
High o'er their heads a mold'ring rock is plac'd,
That promises a fall, and shakes at ev'ry blast.
They lie below, on golden beds display'd;
And genial feasts with regal pomp are made.
The Queen of Furies by their sides is set,
And snatches from their mouths th' untasted meat,
Which if they touch, her hissing snakes she rears,
Tossing her torch, and thund'ring in their ears.
Then they, who brothers' better claim disown,
Expel their parents, and usurp the throne;
Defraud their clients, and, to lucre sold,
Sit brooding on unprofitable gold;
Who dare not give, and ev'n refuse to lend
To their poor kindred, or a wanting friend.
Vast is the throng of these; nor less the train
Of lustful youths, for foul adult'ry slain:
Hosts of deserters, who their honor sold,
And basely broke their faith for bribes of gold.
All these within the dungeon's depth remain,
Despairing pardon, and expecting pain.
Ask not what pains; nor farther seek to know
Their process, or the forms of law below.
Some roll a weighty stone; some, laid along,
And bound with burning wires, on spokes of wheels are hung
Unhappy Theseus, doom'd for ever there,
Is fix'd by fate on his eternal chair;
And wretched Phlegyas warns the world with cries
(Could warning make the world more just or wise):
'Learn righteousness, and dread th' avenging deities.'
To tyrants others have their country sold,
Imposing foreign lords, for foreign gold;
Some have old laws repeal'd, new statutes made,
Not as the people pleas'd, but as they paid;
With incest some their daughters' bed profan'd:
All dar'd the worst of ills, and, what they dar'd, attain'd.
Had I a hundred mouths, a hundred tongues,
And throats of brass, inspir'd with iron lungs,
I could not half those horrid crimes repeat,
Nor half the punishments those crimes have met.
But let us haste our voyage to pursue:
The walls of Pluto's palace are in view;
The gate, and iron arch above it, stands
On anvils labor'd by the Cyclops' hands.
Before our farther way the Fates allow,
Here must we fix on high the golden bough."

She said: and thro' the gloomy shades they pass'd,
And chose the middle path. Arriv'd at last,
The prince with living water sprinkled o'er
His limbs and body; then approach'd the door,
Possess'd the porch, and on the front above
He fix'd the fatal bough requir'd by Pluto's love.
These holy rites perform'd, they took their way
Where long extended plains of pleasure lay:
The verdant fields with those of heav'n may vie,
With ether vested, and a purple sky;
The blissful seats of happy souls below.
Stars of their own, and their own suns, they know;
Their airy limbs in sports they exercise,
And on the green contend the wrestler's prize.
Some in heroic verse divinely sing;
Others in artful measures led the ring.
The Thracian bard, surrounded by the rest,
There stands conspicuous in his flowing vest;
His flying fingers, and harmonious quill,
Strikes sev'n distinguish'd notes, and sev'n at once they fill.
Here found they Teucer's old heroic race,
Born better times and happier years to grace.
Assaracus and Ilus here enjoy
Perpetual fame, with him who founded Troy.
The chief beheld their chariots from afar,
Their shining arms, and coursers train'd to war:
Their lances fix'd in earth, their steeds around,
Free from their harness, graze the flow'ry ground.
The love of horses which they had, alive,
And care of chariots, after death survive.
Some cheerful souls were feasting on the plain;
Some did the song, and some the choir maintain,
Beneath a laurel shade, where mighty Po
Mounts up to woods above, and hides his head below.
Here patriots live, who, for their country's good,
In fighting fields, were prodigal of blood:
Priests of unblemish'd lives here make abode,
And poets worthy their inspiring god;
And searching wits, of more mechanic parts,
Who grac'd their age with new-invented arts:
Those who to worth their bounty did extend,
And those who knew that bounty to commend.
The heads of these with holy fillets bound,
And all their temples were with garlands crown'd.

To these the Sibyl thus her speech address'd,
And first to him surrounded by the rest
(Tow'ring his height, and ample was his breast):
"Say, happy souls, divine Musaeus, say,
Where lives Anchises, and where lies our way
To find the hero, for whose only sake
We sought the dark abodes, and cross'd the bitter lake?"
To this the sacred poet thus replied:
"In no fix'd place the happy souls reside.
In groves we live, and lie on mossy beds,
By crystal streams, that murmur thro' the meads:
But pass yon easy hill, and thence descend;
The path conducts you to your journey's end."
This said, he led them up the mountain's brow,
And shews them all the shining fields below.
They wind the hill, and thro' the blissful meadows go.

But old Anchises, in a flow'ry vale,
Review'd his muster'd race, and took the tale:
Those happy spirits, which, ordain'd by fate,
For future beings and new bodies wait-
With studious thought observ'd th' illustrious throng,
In nature's order as they pass'd along:
Their names, their fates, their conduct, and their care,
In peaceful senates and successful war.
He, when Aeneas on the plain appears,
Meets him with open arms, and falling tears.
"Welcome," he said, "the gods' undoubted race!
O long expected to my dear embrace!
Once more 't is giv'n me to behold your face!
The love and pious duty which you pay
Have pass'd the perils of so hard a way.
'T is true, computing times, I now believ'd
The happy day approach'd; nor are my hopes deceiv'd.
What length of lands, what oceans have you pass'd;
What storms sustain'd, and on what shores been cast?
How have I fear'd your fate! but fear'd it most,
When love assail'd you, on the Libyan coast."
To this, the filial duty thus replies:
"Your sacred ghost before my sleeping eyes
Appear'd, and often urg'd this painful enterprise.
After long tossing on the Tyrrhene sea,
My navy rides at anchor in the bay.
But reach your hand, O parent shade, nor shun
The dear embraces of your longing son!"
He said; and falling tears his face bedew:
Then thrice around his neck his arms he threw;
And thrice the flitting shadow slipp'd away,
Like winds, or empty dreams that fly the day.

Now, in a secret vale, the Trojan sees
A sep'rate grove, thro' which a gentle breeze
Plays with a passing breath, and whispers thro' the trees;
And, just before the confines of the wood,
The gliding Lethe leads her silent flood.
About the boughs an airy nation flew,
Thick as the humming bees, that hunt the golden dew;
In summer's heat on tops of lilies feed,
And creep within their bells, to suck the balmy seed:
The winged army roams the fields around;
The rivers and the rocks remurmur to the sound.
Aeneas wond'ring stood, then ask'd the cause
Which to the stream the crowding people draws.
Then thus the sire: "The souls that throng the flood
Are those to whom, by fate, are other bodies ow'd:
In Lethe's lake they long oblivion taste,
Of future life secure, forgetful of the past.
Long has my soul desir'd this time and place,
To set before your sight your glorious race,
That this presaging joy may fire your mind
To seek the shores by destiny design'd."-
"O father, can it be, that souls sublime
Return to visit our terrestrial clime,
And that the gen'rous mind, releas'd by death,
Can covet lazy limbs and mortal breath?"

Anchises then, in order, thus begun
To clear those wonders to his godlike son:
"Know, first, that heav'n, and earth's compacted frame,
And flowing waters, and the starry flame,
And both the radiant lights, one common soul
Inspires and feeds, and animates the whole.
This active mind, infus'd thro' all the space,
Unites and mingles with the mighty mass.
Hence men and beasts the breath of life obtain,
And birds of air, and monsters of the main.
Th' ethereal vigor is in all the same,
And every soul is fill'd with equal flame;
As much as earthy limbs, and gross allay
Of mortal members, subject to decay,
Blunt not the beams of heav'n and edge of day.
From this coarse mixture of terrestrial parts,
Desire and fear by turns possess their hearts,
And grief, and joy; nor can the groveling mind,
In the dark dungeon of the limbs confin'd,
Assert the native skies, or own its heav'nly kind:
Nor death itself can wholly wash their stains;
But long-contracted filth ev'n in the soul remains.
The relics of inveterate vice they wear,
And spots of sin obscene in ev'ry face appear.
For this are various penances enjoin'd;
And some are hung to bleach upon the wind,
Some plung'd in waters, others purg'd in fires,
Till all the dregs are drain'd, and all the rust expires.
All have their manes, and those manes bear:
The few, so cleans'd, to these abodes repair,
And breathe, in ample fields, the soft Elysian air.
Then are they happy, when by length of time
The scurf is worn away of each committed crime;
No speck is left of their habitual stains,
But the pure ether of the soul remains.
But, when a thousand rolling years are past,
(So long their punishments and penance last,)
Whole droves of minds are, by the driving god,
Compell'd to drink the deep Lethaean flood,
In large forgetful draughts to steep the cares
Of their past labors, and their irksome years,
That, unrememb'ring of its former pain,
The soul may suffer mortal flesh again."

Thus having said, the father spirit leads
The priestess and his son thro' swarms of shades,
And takes a rising ground, from thence to see
The long procession of his progeny.
"Survey," pursued the sire, "this airy throng,
As, offer'd to thy view, they pass along.
These are th' Italian names, which fate will join
With ours, and graff upon the Trojan line.
Observe the youth who first appears in sight,
And holds the nearest station to the light,
Already seems to snuff the vital air,
And leans just forward, on a shining spear:
Silvius is he, thy last-begotten race,
But first in order sent, to fill thy place;
An Alban name, but mix'd with Dardan blood,
Born in the covert of a shady wood:
Him fair Lavinia, thy surviving wife,
Shall breed in groves, to lead a solitary life.
In Alba he shall fix his royal seat,
And, born a king, a race of kings beget.
Then Procas, honor of the Trojan name,
Capys, and Numitor, of endless fame.
A second Silvius after these appears;
Silvius Aeneas, for thy name he bears;
For arms and justice equally renown'd,
Who, late restor'd, in Alba shall be crown'd.
How great they look! how vig'rously they wield
Their weighty lances, and sustain the shield!
But they, who crown'd with oaken wreaths appear,
Shall Gabian walls and strong Fidena rear;
Nomentum, Bola, with Pometia, found;
And raise Collatian tow'rs on rocky ground.
All these shall then be towns of mighty fame,
Tho' now they lie obscure, and lands without a name.
See Romulus the great, born to restore
The crown that once his injur'd grandsire wore.
This prince a priestess of your blood shall bear,
And like his sire in arms he shall appear.
Two rising crests, his royal head adorn;
Born from a god, himself to godhead born:
His sire already signs him for the skies,
And marks the seat amidst the deities.
Auspicious chief! thy race, in times to come,
Shall spread the conquests of imperial Rome-
Rome, whose ascending tow'rs shall heav'n invade,
Involving earth and ocean in her shade;
High as the Mother of the Gods in place,
And proud, like her, of an immortal race.
Then, when in pomp she makes the Phrygian round,
With golden turrets on her temples crown'd;
A hundred gods her sweeping train supply;
Her offspring all, and all command the sky.

"Now fix your sight, and stand intent, to see
Your Roman race, and Julian progeny.
The mighty Caesar waits his vital hour,
Impatient for the world, and grasps his promis'd pow'r.
But next behold the youth of form divine,
Ceasar himself, exalted in his line;
Augustus, promis'd oft, and long foretold,
Sent to the realm that Saturn rul'd of old;
Born to restore a better age of gold.
Afric and India shall his pow'r obey;
He shall extend his propagated sway
Beyond the solar year, without the starry way,
Where Atlas turns the rolling heav'ns around,
And his broad shoulders with their lights are crown'd.
At his foreseen approach, already quake
The Caspian kingdoms and Maeotian lake:
Their seers behold the tempest from afar,
And threat'ning oracles denounce the war.
Nile hears him knocking at his sev'nfold gates,
And seeks his hidden spring, and fears his nephew's fates.
Nor Hercules more lands or labors knew,
Not tho' the brazen-footed hind he slew,
Freed Erymanthus from the foaming boar,
And dipp'd his arrows in Lernaean gore;
Nor Bacchus, turning from his Indian war,
By tigers drawn triumphant in his car,
From Nisus' top descending on the plains,
With curling vines around his purple reins.
And doubt we yet thro' dangers to pursue
The paths of honor, and a crown in view?
But what's the man, who from afar appears?
His head with olive crown'd, his hand a censer bears,
His hoary beard and holy vestments bring
His lost idea back: I know the Roman king.
He shall to peaceful Rome new laws ordain,
Call'd from his mean abode a scepter to sustain.
Him Tullus next in dignity succeeds,
An active prince, and prone to martial deeds.
He shall his troops for fighting fields prepare,
Disus'd to toils, and triumphs of the war.
By dint of sword his crown he shall increase,
And scour his armor from the rust of peace.
Whom Ancus follows, with a fawning air,
But vain within, and proudly popular.
Next view the Tarquin kings, th' avenging sword
Of Brutus, justly drawn, and Rome restor'd.
He first renews the rods and ax severe,
And gives the consuls royal robes to wear.
His sons, who seek the tyrant to sustain,
And long for arbitrary lords again,
With ignominy scourg'd, in open sight,
He dooms to death deserv'd, asserting public right.
Unhappy man, to break the pious laws
Of nature, pleading in his children's cause!
Howeer the doubtful fact is understood,
'T is love of honor, and his country's good:
The consul, not the father, sheds the blood.
Behold Torquatus the same track pursue;
And, next, the two devoted Decii view:
The Drusian line, Camillus loaded home
With standards well redeem'd, and foreign foes o'ercome
The pair you see in equal armor shine,
Now, friends below, in close embraces join;
But, when they leave the shady realms of night,
And, cloth'd in bodies, breathe your upper light,
With mortal hate each other shall pursue:
What wars, what wounds, what slaughter shall ensue!
From Alpine heights the father first descends;
His daughter's husband in the plain attends:
His daughter's husband arms his eastern friends.
Embrace again, my sons, be foes no more;
Nor stain your country with her children's gore!
And thou, the first, lay down thy lawless claim,
Thou, of my blood, who bearist the Julian name!
Another comes, who shall in triumph ride,
And to the Capitol his chariot guide,
From conquer'd Corinth, rich with Grecian spoils.
And yet another, fam'd for warlike toils,
On Argos shall impose the Roman laws,
And on the Greeks revenge the Trojan cause;
Shall drag in chains their Achillean race;
Shall vindicate his ancestors' disgrace,
And Pallas, for her violated place.
Great Cato there, for gravity renown'd,
And conqu'ring Cossus goes with laurels crown'd.
Who can omit the Gracchi? who declare
The Scipios' worth, those thunderbolts of war,
The double bane of Carthage? Who can see
Without esteem for virtuous poverty,
Severe Fabricius, or can cease t' admire
The plowman consul in his coarse attire?
Tir'd as I am, my praise the Fabii claim;
And thou, great hero, greatest of thy name,
Ordain'd in war to save the sinking state,
And, by delays, to put a stop to fate!
Let others better mold the running mass
Of metals, and inform the breathing brass,
And soften into flesh a marble face;
Plead better at the bar; describe the skies,
And when the stars descend, and when they rise.
But, Rome, 't is thine alone, with awful sway,
To rule mankind, and make the world obey,
Disposing peace and war by thy own majestic way;
To tame the proud, the fetter'd slave to free:
These are imperial arts, and worthy thee."

He paus'd; and, while with wond'ring eyes they view'd
The passing spirits, thus his speech renew'd:
"See great Marcellus! how, untir'd in toils,
He moves with manly grace, how rich with regal spoils!
He, when his country, threaten'd with alarms,
Requires his courage and his conqu'ring arms,
Shall more than once the Punic bands affright;
Shall kill the Gaulish king in single fight;
Then to the Capitol in triumph move,
And the third spoils shall grace Feretrian Jove."
Aeneas here beheld, of form divine,
A godlike youth in glitt'ring armor shine,
With great Marcellus keeping equal pace;
But gloomy were his eyes, dejected was his face.
He saw, and, wond'ring, ask'd his airy guide,
What and of whence was he, who press'd the hero's side:
"His son, or one of his illustrious name?
How like the former, and almost the same!
Observe the crowds that compass him around;
All gaze, and all admire, and raise a shouting sound:
But hov'ring mists around his brows are spread,
And night, with sable shades, involves his head."
"Seek not to know," the ghost replied with tears,
"The sorrows of thy sons in future years.
This youth (the blissful vision of a day)
Shall just be shown on earth, and snatch'd away.
The gods too high had rais'd the Roman state,
Were but their gifts as permanent as great.
What groans of men shall fill the Martian field!
How fierce a blaze his flaming pile shall yield!
What fun'ral pomp shall floating Tiber see,
When, rising from his bed, he views the sad solemnity!
No youth shall equal hopes of glory give,
No youth afford so great a cause to grieve;
The Trojan honor, and the Roman boast,
Admir'd when living, and ador'd when lost!
Mirror of ancient faith in early youth!
Undaunted worth, inviolable truth!
No foe, unpunish'd, in the fighting field
Shall dare thee, foot to foot, with sword and shield;
Much less in arms oppose thy matchless force,
When thy sharp spurs shall urge thy foaming horse.
Ah! couldst thou break thro' fate's severe decree,
A new Marcellus shall arise in thee!
Full canisters of fragrant lilies bring,
Mix'd with the purple roses of the spring;
Let me with fun'ral flow'rs his body strow;
This gift which parents to their children owe,
This unavailing gift, at least, I may bestow!"
Thus having said, he led the hero round
The confines of the blest Elysian ground;
Which when Anchises to his son had shown,
And fir'd his mind to mount the promis'd throne,
He tells the future wars, ordain'd by fate;
The strength and customs of the Latian state;
The prince, and people; and forearms his care
With rules, to push his fortune, or to bear.

Two gates the silent house of Sleep adorn;
Of polish'd ivory this, that of transparent horn:
True visions thro' transparent horn arise;
Thro' polish'd ivory pass deluding lies.
Of various things discoursing as he pass'd,
Anchises hither bends his steps at last.
Then, thro' the gate of iv'ry, he dismiss'd
His valiant offspring and divining guest.
Straight to the ships Aeneas his way,
Embark'd his men, and skimm'd along the sea,
Still coasting, till he gain'd Cajeta's bay.
At length on oozy ground his galleys moor;
Their heads are turn'd to sea, their sterns to shore.





And thou, O matron of immortal fame,
Here dying, to the shore hast left thy name;
Cajeta still the place is call'd from thee,
The nurse of great Aeneas' infancy.
Here rest thy bones in rich Hesperia's plains;
Thy name ('t is all a ghost can have) remains.

Now, when the prince her fun'ral rites had paid,
He plow'd the Tyrrhene seas with sails display'd.
From land a gentle breeze arose by night,
Serenely shone the stars, the moon was bright,
And the sea trembled with her silver light.
Now near the shelves of Circe's shores they run,
(Circe the rich, the daughter of the Sun,)
A dang'rous coast: the goddess wastes her days
In joyous songs; the rocks resound her lays:
In spinning, or the loom, she spends the night,
And cedar brands supply her father's light.
From hence were heard, rebellowing to the main,
The roars of lions that refuse the chain,
The grunts of bristled boars, and groans of bears,
And herds of howling wolves that stun the sailors' ears.
These from their caverns, at the close of night,
Fill the sad isle with horror and affright.
Darkling they mourn their fate, whom Circe's pow'r,
(That watch'd the moon and planetary hour,)
With words and wicked herbs from humankind
Had alter'd, and in brutal shapes confin'd.
Which monsters lest the Trojans' pious host
Should bear, or touch upon th' inchanted coast,
Propitious Neptune steer'd their course by night
With rising gales that sped their happy flight.
Supplied with these, they skim the sounding shore,
And hear the swelling surges vainly roar.
Now, when the rosy morn began to rise,
And wav'd her saffron streamer thro' the skies;
When Thetis blush'd in purple not her own,
And from her face the breathing winds were blown,
A sudden silence sate upon the sea,
And sweeping oars, with struggling, urge their way.
The Trojan, from the main, beheld a wood,
Which thick with shades and a brown horror stood:
Betwixt the trees the Tiber took his course,
With whirlpools dimpled; and with downward force,
That drove the sand along, he took his way,
And roll'd his yellow billows to the sea.
About him, and above, and round the wood,
The birds that haunt the borders of his flood,
That bath'd within, or basked upon his side,
To tuneful songs their narrow throats applied.
The captain gives command; the joyful train
Glide thro' the gloomy shade, and leave the main.

Now, Erato, thy poet's mind inspire,
And fill his soul with thy celestial fire!
Relate what Latium was; her ancient kings;
Declare the past and state of things,
When first the Trojan fleet Ausonia sought,
And how the rivals lov'd, and how they fought.
These are my theme, and how the war began,
And how concluded by the godlike man:
For I shall sing of battles, blood, and rage,
Which princes and their people did engage;
And haughty souls, that, mov'd with mutual hate,
In fighting fields pursued and found their fate;
That rous'd the Tyrrhene realm with loud alarms,
And peaceful Italy involv'd in arms.
A larger scene of action is display'd;
And, rising hence, a greater work is weigh'd.

Latinus, old and mild, had long possess'd
The Latin scepter, and his people blest:
His father Faunus; a Laurentian dame
His mother; fair Marica was her name.
But Faunus came from Picus: Picus drew
His birth from Saturn, if records be true.
Thus King Latinus, in the third degree,
Had Saturn author of his family.
But this old peaceful prince, as Heav'n decreed,
Was blest with no male issue to succeed:
His sons in blooming youth were snatch'd by fate;
One only daughter heir'd the royal state.
Fir'd with her love, and with ambition led,
The neighb'ring princes court her nuptial bed.
Among the crowd, but far above the rest,
Young Turnus to the beauteous maid address'd.
Turnus, for high descent and graceful mien,
Was first, and favor'd by the Latian queen;
With him she strove to join Lavinia's hand,
But dire portents the purpos'd match withstand.

Deep in the palace, of long growth, there stood
A laurel's trunk, a venerable wood;
Where rites divine were paid; whose holy hair
Was kept and cut with superstitious care.
This plant Latinus, when his town he wall'd,
Then found, and from the tree Laurentum call'd;
And last, in honor of his new abode,
He vow'd the laurel to the laurel's god.
It happen'd once (a boding prodigy!)
A swarm of bees, that cut the liquid sky,
(Unknown from whence they took their airy flight,)
Upon the topmost branch in clouds alight;
There with their clasping feet together clung,
And a long cluster from the laurel hung.
An ancient augur prophesied from hence:
"Behold on Latian shores a foreign prince!
From the same parts of heav'n his navy stands,
To the same parts on earth; his army lands;
The town he conquers, and the tow'r commands."

Yet more, when fair Lavinia fed the fire
Before the gods, and stood beside her sire,
(Strange to relate!) the flames, involv'd in smoke
Of incense, from the sacred altar broke,
Caught her dishevel'd hair and rich attire;
Her crown and jewels crackled in the fire:
From thence the fuming trail began to spread
And lambent glories danc'd about her head.
This new portent the seer with wonder views,
Then pausing, thus his prophecy renews:
"The nymph, who scatters flaming fires around,
Shall shine with honor, shall herself be crown'd;
But, caus'd by her irrevocable fate,
War shall the country waste, and change the state."

Latinus, frighted with this dire ostent,
For counsel to his father Faunus went,
And sought the shades renown'd for prophecy
Which near Albunea's sulph'rous fountain lie.
To these the Latian and the Sabine land
Fly, when distress'd, and thence relief demand.
The priest on skins of off'rings takes his ease,
And nightly visions in his slumber sees;
A swarm of thin aerial shapes appears,
And, flutt'ring round his temples, deafs his ears:
These he consults, the future fates to know,
From pow'rs above, and from the fiends below.
Here, for the gods' advice, Latinus flies,
Off'ring a hundred sheep for sacrifice:
Their woolly fleeces, as the rites requir'd,
He laid beneath him, and to rest retir'd.
No sooner were his eyes in slumber bound,
When, from above, a more than mortal sound
Invades his ears; and thus the vision spoke:
"Seek not, my seed, in Latian bands to yoke
Our fair Lavinia, nor the gods provoke.
A foreign son upon thy shore descends,
Whose martial fame from pole to pole extends.
His race, in arms and arts of peace renown'd,
Not Latium shall contain, nor Europe bound:
'T is theirs whate'er the sun surveys around."
These answers, in the silent night receiv'd,
The king himself divulg'd, the land believ'd:
The fame thro' all the neighb'ring nations flew,
When now the Trojan navy was in view.

Beneath a shady tree, the hero spread
His table on the turf, with cakes of bread;
And, with his chiefs, on forest fruits he fed.
They sate; and, (not without the god's command,)
Their homely fare dispatch'd, the hungry band
Invade their trenchers next, and soon devour,
To mend the scanty meal, their cakes of flour.
Ascanius this observ'd, and smiling said:
"See, we devour the plates on which we fed."
The speech had omen, that the Trojan race
Should find repose, and this the time and place.
Aeneas took the word, and thus replies,
Confessing fate with wonder in his eyes:
"All hail, O earth! all hail, my household gods!
Behold the destin'd place of your abodes!
For thus Anchises prophesied of old,
And this our fatal place of rest foretold:
'When, on a foreign shore, instead of meat,
By famine forc'd, your trenchers you shall eat,
Then ease your weary Trojans will attend,
And the long labors of your voyage end.
Remember on that happy coast to build,
And with a trench inclose the fruitful field.'
This was that famine, this the fatal place
Which ends the wand'ring of our exil'd race.
Then, on to-morrow's dawn, your care employ,
To search the land, and where the cities lie,
And what the men; but give this day to joy.
Now pour to Jove; and, after Jove is blest,
Call great Anchises to the genial feast:
Crown high the goblets with a cheerful draught;
Enjoy the present hour; adjourn the future thought."

Thus having said, the hero bound his brows
With leafy branches, then perform'd his vows;
Adoring first the genius of the place,
Then Earth, the mother of the heav'nly race,
The nymphs, and native godheads yet unknown,
And Night, and all the stars that gild her sable throne,
And ancient Cybel, and Idaean Jove,
And last his sire below, and mother queen above.
Then heav'n's high monarch thunder'd thrice aloud,
And thrice he shook aloft a golden cloud.
Soon thro' the joyful camp a rumor flew,
The time was come their city to renew.
Then ev'ry brow with cheerful green is crown'd,
The feasts are doubled, and the bowls go round.

When next the rosy morn disclos'd the day,
The scouts to sev'ral parts divide their way,
To learn the natives' names, their towns explore,
The coasts and trendings of the crooked shore:
Here Tiber flows, and here Numicus stands;
Here warlike Latins hold the happy lands.
The pious chief, who sought by peaceful ways
To found his empire, and his town to raise,
A hundred youths from all his train selects,
And to the Latian court their course directs,
(The spacious palace where their prince resides,)
And all their heads with wreaths of olive hides.
They go commission'd to require a peace,
And carry presents to procure access.
Thus while they speed their pace, the prince designs
His new-elected seat, and draws the lines.
The Trojans round the place a rampire cast,
And palisades about the trenches plac'd.

Meantime the train, proceeding on their way,
From far the town and lofty tow'rs survey;
At length approach the walls. Without the gate,
They see the boys and Latian youth debate
The martial prizes on the dusty plain:
Some drive the cars, and some the coursers rein;
Some bend the stubborn bow for victory,
And some with darts their active sinews try.
A posting messenger, dispatch'd from hence,
Of this fair troop advis'd their aged prince,
That foreign men of mighty stature came;
Uncouth their habit, and unknown their name.
The king ordains their entrance, and ascends
His regal seat, surrounded by his friends.

The palace built by Picus, vast and proud,
Supported by a hundred pillars stood,
And round incompass'd with a rising wood.
The pile o'erlook'd the town, and drew the sight;
Surpris'd at once with reverence and delight.
There kings receiv'd the marks of sov'reign pow'r;
In state the monarchs march'd; the lictors bore
Their awful axes and the rods before.
Here the tribunal stood, the house of pray'r,
And here the sacred senators repair;
All at large tables, in long order set,
A ram their off'ring, and a ram their meat.
Above the portal, carv'd in cedar wood,
Plac'd in their ranks, their godlike grandsires stood;
Old Saturn, with his crooked scythe, on high;
And Italus, that led the colony;
And ancient Janus, with his double face,
And bunch of keys, the porter of the place.
There good Sabinus, planter of the vines,
On a short pruning hook his head reclines,
And studiously surveys his gen'rous wines;
Then warlike kings, who for their country fought,
And honorable wounds from battle brought.
Around the posts hung helmets, darts, and spears,
And captive chariots, axes, shields, and bars,
And broken beaks of ships, the trophies of their wars.
Above the rest, as chief of all the band,
Was Picus plac'd, a buckler in his hand;
His other wav'd a long divining wand.
Girt in his Gabin gown the hero sate,
Yet could not with his art avoid his fate:
For Circe long had lov'd the youth in vain,
Till love, refus'd, converted to disdain:
Then, mixing pow'rful herbs, with magic art,
She chang'd his form, who could not change his heart;
Constrain'd him in a bird, and made him fly,
With party-color'd plumes, a chatt'ring pie.

In this high temple, on a chair of state,
The seat of audience, old Latinus sate;
Then gave admission to the Trojan train;
And thus with pleasing accents he began:
"Tell me, ye Trojans, for that name you own,
Nor is your course upon our coasts unknown-
Say what you seek, and whither were you bound:
Were you by stress of weather cast aground?
(Such dangers as on seas are often seen,
And oft befall to miserable men,)
Or come, your shipping in our ports to lay,
Spent and disabled in so long a way?
Say what you want: the Latians you shall find
Not forc'd to goodness, but by will inclin'd;
For, since the time of Saturn's holy reign,
His hospitable customs we retain.
I call to mind (but time the tale has worn)
Th' Arunci told, that Dardanus, tho' born
On Latian plains, yet sought the Phrygian shore,
And Samothracia, Samos call'd before.
From Tuscan Coritum he claim'd his birth;
But after, when exempt from mortal earth,
From thence ascended to his kindred skies,
A god, and, as a god, augments their sacrifice,"

He said. Ilioneus made this reply:
"O king, of Faunus' royal family!
Nor wintry winds to Latium forc'd our way,
Nor did the stars our wand'ring course betray.
Willing we sought your shores; and, hither bound,
The port, so long desir'd, at length we found;
From our sweet homes and ancient realms expell'd;
Great as the greatest that the sun beheld.
The god began our line, who rules above;
And, as our race, our king descends from Jove:
And hither are we come, by his command,
To crave admission in your happy land.
How dire a tempest, from Mycenae pour'd,
Our plains, our temples, and our town devour'd;
What was the waste of war, what fierce alarms
Shook Asia's crown with European arms;
Ev'n such have heard, if any such there be,
Whose earth is bounded by the frozen sea;
And such as, born beneath the burning sky
And sultry sun, betwixt the tropics lie.
From that dire deluge, thro' the wat'ry waste,
Such length of years, such various perils past,
At last escap'd, to Latium we repair,
To beg what you without your want may spare:
The common water, and the common air;
Sheds which ourselves will build, and mean abodes,
Fit to receive and serve our banish'd gods.
Nor our admission shall your realm disgrace,
Nor length of time our gratitude efface.
Besides, what endless honor you shall gain,
To save and shelter Troy's unhappy train!
Now, by my sov'reign, and his fate, I swear,
Renown'd for faith in peace, for force in war;
Oft our alliance other lands desir'd,
And, what we seek of you, of us requir'd.
Despite not then, that in our hands we bear
These holy boughs, sue with words of pray'r.
Fate and the gods, by their supreme command,
Have doom'd our ships to seek the Latian land.
To these abodes our fleet Apollo sends;
Here Dardanus was born, and hither tends;
Where Tuscan Tiber rolls with rapid force,
And where Numicus opes his holy source.
Besides, our prince presents, with his request,
Some small remains of what his sire possess'd.
This golden charger, snatch'd from burning Troy,
Anchises did in sacrifice employ;
This royal robe and this tiara wore
Old Priam, and this golden scepter bore
In full assemblies, and in solemn games;
These purple vests were weav'd by Dardan dames."

Thus while he spoke, Latinus roll'd around
His eyes, and fix'd a while upon the ground.
Intent he seem'd, and anxious in his breast;
Not by the scepter mov'd, or kingly vest,
But pond'ring future things of wondrous weight;
Succession, empire, and his daughter's fate.
On these he mus'd within his thoughtful mind,
And then revolv'd what Faunus had divin'd.
This was the foreign prince, by fate decreed
To share his scepter, and Lavinia's bed;
This was the race that sure portents foreshew
To sway the world, and land and sea subdue.
At length he rais'd his cheerful head, and spoke:
"The pow'rs," said he, "the pow'rs we both invoke,
To you, and yours, and mine, propitious be,
And firm our purpose with their augury!
Have what you ask; your presents I receive;
Land, where and when you please, with ample leave;
Partake and use my kingdom as your own;
All shall be yours, while I command the crown:
And, if my wish'd alliance please your king,
Tell him he should not send the peace, but bring.
Then let him not a friend's embraces fear;
The peace is made when I behold him here.
Besides this answer, tell my royal guest,
I add to his commands my own request:
One only daughter heirs my crown and state,
Whom not our oracles, nor Heav'n, nor fate,
Nor frequent prodigies, permit to join
With any native of th' Ausonian line.
A foreign son-in-law shall come from far
(Such is our doom), a chief renown'd in war,
Whose race shall bear aloft the Latian name,
And thro' the conquer'd world diffuse our fame.
Himself to be the man the fates require,
I firmly judge, and, what I judge, desire."

He said, and then on each bestow'd a steed.
Three hundred horses, in high stables fed,
Stood ready, shining all, and smoothly dress'd:
Of these he chose the fairest and the best,
To mount the Trojan troop. At his command
The steeds caparison'd with purple stand,
With golden trappings, glorious to behold,
And champ betwixt their teeth the foaming gold.
Then to his absent guest the king decreed
A pair of coursers born of heav'nly breed,
Who from their nostrils breath'd ethereal fire;
Whom Circe stole from her celestial sire,
By substituting mares produc'd on earth,
Whose wombs conceiv'd a more than mortal birth.
These draw the chariot which Latinus sends,
And the rich present to the prince commends.
Sublime on stately steeds the Trojans borne,
To their expecting lord with peace return.

But jealous Juno, from Pachynus' height,
As she from Argos took her airy flight,
Beheld with envious eyes this hateful sight.
She saw the Trojan and his joyful train
Descend upon the shore, desert the main,
Design a town, and, with unhop'd success,
Th' embassadors return with promis'd peace.
Then, pierc'd with pain, she shook her haughty head,
Sigh'd from her inward soul, and thus she said:
"O hated offspring of my Phrygian foes!
O fates of Troy, which Juno's fates oppose!
Could they not fall unpitied on the plain,
But slain revive, and, taken, scape again?
When execrable Troy in ashes lay,
Thro' fires and swords and seas they forc'd their way.
Then vanquish'd Juno must in vain contend,
Her rage disarm'd, her empire at an end.
Breathless and tir'd, is all my fury spent?
Or does my glutted spleen at length relent?
As if 't were little from their town to chase,
I thro' the seas pursued their exil'd race;
Ingag'd the heav'ns, oppos'd the stormy main;
But billows roar'd, and tempests rag'd in vain.
What have my Scyllas and my Syrtes done,
When these they overpass, and those they shun?
On Tiber's shores they land, secure of fate,
Triumphant o'er the storms and Juno's hate.
Mars could in mutual blood the Centaurs bathe,
And Jove himself gave way to Cynthia's wrath,
Who sent the tusky boar to Calydon;
(What great offense had either people done?)
But I, the consort of the Thunderer,
Have wag'd a long and unsuccessful war,
With various arts and arms in vain have toil'd,
And by a mortal man at length am foil'd.
If native pow'r prevail not, shall I doubt
To seek for needful succor from without?
If Jove and Heav'n my just desires deny,
Hell shall the pow'r of Heav'n and Jove supply.
Grant that the Fates have firm'd, by their decree,
The Trojan race to reign in Italy;
At least I can defer the nuptial day,
And with protracted wars the peace delay:
With blood the dear alliance shall be bought,
And both the people near destruction brought;
So shall the son-in-law and father join,
With ruin, war, and waste of either line.
O fatal maid, thy marriage is endow'd
With Phrygian, Latian, and Rutulian blood!
Bellona leads thee to thy lover's hand;
Another queen brings forth another brand,
To burn with foreign fires another land!
A second Paris, diff'ring but in name,
Shall fire his country with a second flame."

Thus having said, she sinks beneath the ground,
With furious haste, and shoots the Stygian sound,
To rouse Alecto from th' infernal seat
Of her dire sisters, and their dark retreat.
This Fury, fit for her intent, she chose;
One who delights in wars and human woes.
Ev'n Pluto hates his own misshapen race;
Her sister Furies fly her hideous face;
So frightful are the forms the monster takes,
So fierce the hissings of her speckled snakes.
Her Juno finds, and thus inflames her spite:
"O virgin daughter of eternal Night,
Give me this once thy labor, to sustain
My right, and execute my just disdain.
Let not the Trojans, with a feign'd pretense
Of proffer'd peace, delude the Latian prince.
Expel from Italy that odious name,
And let not Juno suffer in her fame.
'T is thine to ruin realms, o'erturn a state,
Betwixt the dearest friends to raise debate,
And kindle kindred blood to mutual hate.
Thy hand o'er towns the fun'ral torch displays,
And forms a thousand ills ten thousand ways.
Now shake, out thy fruitful breast, the seeds
Of envy, discord, and of cruel deeds:
Confound the peace establish'd, and prepare
Their souls to hatred, and their hands to war."

Smear'd as she was with black Gorgonian blood,
The Fury sprang above the Stygian flood;
And on her wicker wings, sublime thro' night,
She to the Latian palace took her flight:
There sought the queen's apartment, stood before
The peaceful threshold, and besieg'd the door.
Restless Amata lay, her swelling breast
Fir'd with disdain for Turnus dispossess'd,
And the new nuptials of the Trojan guest.
From her black bloody locks the Fury shakes
Her darling plague, the fav'rite of her snakes;
With her full force she threw the poisonous dart,
And fix'd it deep within Amata's heart,
That, thus envenom'd, she might kindle rage,
And sacrifice to strife her house husband's age.
Unseen, unfelt, the fiery serpent skims
Betwixt her linen and her naked limbs;
His baleful breath inspiring, as he glides,
Now like a chain around her neck he rides,
Now like a fillet to her head repairs,
And with his circling volumes folds her hairs.
At first the silent venom slid with ease,
And seiz'd her cooler senses by degrees;
Then, ere th' infected mass was fir'd too far,
In plaintive accents she began the war,
And thus bespoke her husband: "Shall," she said,
"A wand'ring prince enjoy Lavinia's bed?
If nature plead not in a parent's heart,
Pity my tears, and pity her desert.
I know, my dearest lord, the time will come,
You in vain, reverse your cruel doom;
The faithless pirate soon will set to sea,
And bear the royal virgin far away!
A guest like him, a Trojan guest before,
In shew of friendship sought the Spartan shore,
And ravish'd Helen from her husband bore.
Think on a king's inviolable word;
And think on Turnus, her once plighted lord:
To this false foreigner you give your throne,
And wrong a friend, a kinsman, and a son.
Resume your ancient care; and, if the god
Your sire, and you, resolve on foreign blood,
Know all are foreign, in a larger sense,
Not born your subjects, or deriv'd from hence.
Then, if the line of Turnus you retrace,
He springs from Inachus of Argive race."

But when she saw her reasons idly spent,
And could not move him from his fix'd intent,
She flew to rage; for now the snake possess'd
Her vital parts, and poison'd all her breast;
She raves, she runs with a distracted pace,
And fills with horrid howls the public place.
And, as young striplings whip the top for sport,
On the smooth pavement of an empty court;
The wooden engine flies and whirls about,
Admir'd, with clamors, of the beardless rout;
They lash aloud; each other they provoke,
And lend their little souls at ev'ry stroke:
Thus fares the queen; and thus her fury blows
Amidst the crowd, and kindles as she goes.
Nor yet content, she strains her malice more,
And adds new ills to those contriv'd before:
She flies the town, and, mixing with a throng
Of madding matrons, bears the bride along,
Wand'ring thro' woods and wilds, and devious ways,
And with these arts the Trojan match delays.
She feign'd the rites of Bacchus; cried aloud,
And to the buxom god the virgin vow'd.
"Evoe! O Bacchus!" thus began the song;
And "Evoe!" answer'd all the female throng.
"O virgin! worthy thee alone!" she cried;
"O worthy thee alone!" the crew replied.
"For thee she feeds her hair, she leads thy dance,
And with thy winding ivy wreathes her lance."
Like fury seiz'd the rest; the progress known,
All seek the mountains, and forsake the town:
All, clad in skins of beasts, the jav'lin bear,
Give to the wanton winds their flowing hair,
And shrieks and shoutings rend the suff'ring air.
The queen herself, inspir'd with rage divine,
Shook high above her head a flaming pine;
Then roll'd her haggard eyes around the throng,
And sung, in Turnus' name, the nuptial song:
"Io, ye Latian dames! if any here
Hold your unhappy queen, Amata, dear;
If there be here," she said, "who dare maintain
My right, nor think the name of mother vain;
Unbind your fillets, loose your flowing hair,
And orgies and nocturnal rites prepare."

Amata's breast the Fury thus invades,
And fires with rage, amid the sylvan shades;
Then, when she found her venom spread so far,
The royal house embroil'd in civil war,
Rais'd on her dusky wings, she cleaves the skies,
And seeks the palace where young Turnus lies.
His town, as fame reports, was built of old
By Danae, pregnant with almighty gold,
Who fled her father's rage, and, with a train
Of following Argives, thro' the stormy main,
Driv'n by the southern blasts, was fated here to reign.
'T was Ardua once; now Ardea's name it bears;
Once a fair city, now consum'd with years.
Here, in his lofty palace, Turnus lay,
Betwixt the confines of the night and day,
Secure in sleep. The Fury laid aside
Her looks and limbs, and with new methods tried
The foulness of th' infernal form to hide.
Propp'd on a staff, she takes a trembling mien:
Her face is furrow'd, and her front obscene;
Deep-dinted wrinkles on her cheek she draws;
Sunk are her eyes, and toothless are her jaws;
Her hoary hair with holy fillets bound,
Her temples with an olive wreath are crown'd.
Old Chalybe, who kept the sacred fane
Of Juno, now she seem'd, and thus began,
Appearing in a dream, to rouse the careless man:
"Shall Turnus then such endless toil sustain
In fighting fields, and conquer towns in vain?
Win, for a Trojan head to wear the prize,
Usurp thy crown, enjoy thy victories?
The bride and scepter which thy blood has bought,
The king transfers; and foreign heirs are sought.
Go now, deluded man, and seek again
New toils, new dangers, on the dusty plain.
Repel the Tuscan foes; their city seize;
Protect the Latians in luxurious ease.
This dream all-pow'rful Juno sends; I bear
Her mighty mandates, and her words you hear.
Haste; arm your Ardeans; issue to the plain;
With fate to friend, assault the Trojan train:
Their thoughtless chiefs, their painted ships, that lie
In Tiber's mouth, with fire and sword destroy.
The Latian king, unless he shall submit,
Own his old promise, and his new forget-
Let him, in arms, the pow'r of Turnus prove,
And learn to fear whom he disdains to love.
For such is Heav'n's command." The youthful prince
With scorn replied, and made this bold defense:
"You tell me, mother, what I knew before:
The Phrygian fleet is landed on the shore.
I neither fear nor will provoke the war;
My fate is Juno's most peculiar care.
But time has made you dote, and vainly tell
Of arms imagin'd in your lonely cell.
Go; be the temple and the gods your care;
Permit to men the thought of peace and war."

These haughty words Alecto's rage provoke,
And frighted Turnus trembled as she spoke.
Her eyes grow stiffen'd, and with sulphur burn;
Her hideous looks and hellish form return;
Her curling snakes with hissings fill the place,
And open all the furies of her face:
Then, darting fire from her malignant eyes,
She cast him backward as he strove to rise,
And, ling'ring, sought to frame some new replies.
High on her head she rears two twisted snakes,
Her chains she rattles, and her whip she shakes;
And, churning bloody foam, thus loudly speaks:
"Behold whom time has made to dote, and tell
Of arms imagin'd in her lonely cell!
Behold the Fates' infernal minister!
War, death, destruction, in my hand I bear."

Thus having said, her smold'ring torch, impress'd
With her full force, she plung'd into his breast.
Aghast he wak'd; and, starting from his bed,
Cold sweat, in clammy drops, his limbs o'erspread.
"Arms! arms!" he cries: "my sword and shield prepare!"
He breathes defiance, blood, and mortal war.
So, when with crackling flames a caldron fries,
The bubbling waters from the bottom rise:
Above the brims they force their fiery way;
Black vapors climb aloft, and cloud the day.

The peace polluted thus, a chosen band
He first commissions to the Latian land,
In threat'ning embassy; then rais'd the rest,
To meet in arms th' intruding Trojan guest,
To force the foes from the Lavinian shore,
And Italy's indanger'd peace restore.
Himself alone an equal match he boasts,
To fight the Phrygian and Ausonian hosts.
The gods invok'd, the Rutuli prepare
Their arms, and warn each other to the war.
His beauty these, and those his blooming age,
The rest his house and his own fame ingage.

While Turnus urges thus his enterprise,
The Stygian Fury to the Trojans flies;
New frauds invents, and takes a steepy stand,
Which overlooks the vale with wide command;
Where fair Ascanius and his youthful train,
With horns and hounds, a hunting match ordain,
And pitch their toils around the shady plain.
The Fury fires the pack; they snuff, they vent,
And feed their hungry nostrils with the scent.
'Twas of a well-grown stag, whose antlers rise
High o'er his front; his beams invade the skies.
From this light cause th' infernal maid prepares
The country churls to mischief, hate, and wars.

The stately beast the two Tyrrhidae bred,
Snatch'd from his dams, and the tame youngling fed.
Their father Tyrrheus did his fodder bring,
Tyrrheus, chief ranger to the Latian king:
Their sister Silvia cherish'd with her care
The little wanton, and did wreaths prepare
To hang his budding horns, with ribbons tied
His tender neck, and comb'd his silken hide,
And bathed his body. Patient of command
In time he grew, and, growing us'd to hand,
He waited at his master's board for food;
Then sought his salvage kindred in the wood,
Where grazing all the day, at night he came
To his known lodgings, and his country dame.

This household beast, that us'd the woodland grounds,
Was view'd at first by the young hero's hounds,
As down the stream he swam, to seek retreat
In the cool waters, and to quench his heat.
Ascanius young, and eager of his game,
Soon bent his bow, uncertain in his aim;
But the dire fiend the fatal arrow guides,
Which pierc'd his bowels thro' his panting sides.
The bleeding creature issues from the floods,
Possess'd with fear, and seeks his known abodes,
His old familiar hearth and household gods.
He falls; he fills the house with heavy groans,
Implores their pity, and his pain bemoans.
Young Silvia beats her breast, and cries aloud
For succor from the clownish neighborhood:
The churls assemble; for the fiend, who lay
In the close woody covert, urg'd their way.
One with a brand yet burning from the flame,
Arm'd with a knotty club another came:
Whate'er they catch or find, without their care,
Their fury makes an instrument of war.
Tyrrheus, the foster father of the beast,
Then clench'd a hatchet in his horny fist,
But held his hand from the descending stroke,
And left his wedge within the cloven oak,
To whet their courage and their rage provoke.
And now the goddess, exercis'd in ill,
Who watch'd an hour to work her impious will,
Ascends the roof, and to her crooked horn,
Such as was then by Latian shepherds borne,
Adds all her breath: the rocks and woods around,
And mountains, tremble at th' infernal sound.
The sacred lake of Trivia from afar,
The Veline fountains, and sulphureous Nar,
Shake at the baleful blast, the signal of the war.
Young mothers wildly stare, with fear possess'd,
And strain their helpless infants to their breast.

The clowns, a boist'rous, rude, ungovern'd crew,
With furious haste to the loud summons flew.
The pow'rs of Troy, then issuing on the plain,
With fresh recruits their youthful chief sustain:
Not theirs a raw and unexperienc'd train,
But a firm body of embattled men.
At first, while fortune favor'd neither side,
The fight with clubs and burning brands was tried;
But now, both parties reinforc'd, the fields
Are bright with flaming swords and brazen shields.
A shining harvest either host displays,
And shoots against the sun with equal rays.
Thus, when a black-brow'd gust begins to rise,
White foam at first on the curl'd ocean fries;
Then roars the main, the billows mount the skies;
Till, by the fury of the storm full blown,
The muddy bottom o'er the clouds is thrown.
First Almon falls, old Tyrrheus' eldest care,
Pierc'd with an arrow from the distant war:
Fix'd in his throat the flying weapon stood,
And stopp'd his breath, and drank his vital blood
Huge heaps of slain around the body rise:
Among the rest, the rich Galesus lies;
A good old man, while peace he preach'd in vain,
Amidst the madness of th' unruly train:
Five herds, five bleating flocks, his pastures fill'd;
His lands a hundred yoke of oxen till'd.

Thus, while in equal scales their fortune stood
The Fury bath'd them in each other's blood;
Then, having fix'd the fight, exulting flies,
And bears fulfill'd her promise to the skies.
To Juno thus she speaks: "Behold! It is done,
The blood already drawn, the war begun;
The discord is complete; nor can they cease
The dire debate, nor you command the peace.
Now, since the Latian and the Trojan brood
Have tasted vengeance and the sweets of blood;
Speak, and my pow'r shall add this office more:
The neighb'ing nations of th' Ausonian shore
Shall hear the dreadful rumor, from afar,
Of arm'd invasion, and embrace the war."
Then Juno thus: "The grateful work is done,
The seeds of discord sow'd, the war begun;
Frauds, fears, and fury have possess'd the state,
And fix'd the causes of a lasting hate.
A bloody Hymen shall th' alliance join
Betwixt the Trojan and Ausonian line:
But thou with speed to night and hell repair;
For not the gods, nor angry Jove, will bear
Thy lawless wand'ring walks in upper air.
Leave what remains to me." Saturnia said:
The sullen fiend her sounding wings display'd,
Unwilling left the light, and sought the nether shade.

In midst of Italy, well known to fame,
There lies a lake (Amsanctus is the name)
Below the lofty mounts: on either side
Thick forests the forbidden entrance hide.
Full in the center of the sacred wood
An arm arises of the Stygian flood,
Which, breaking from beneath with bellowing sound,
Whirls the black waves and rattling stones around.
Here Pluto pants for breath from out his cell,
And opens wide the grinning jaws of hell.
To this infernal lake the Fury flies;
Here hides her hated head, and frees the lab'ring skies.

Saturnian Juno now, with double care,
Attends the fatal process of the war.
The clowns, return'd, from battle bear the slain,
Implore the gods, and to their king complain.
The corps of Almon and the rest are shown;
Shrieks, clamors, murmurs, fill the frighted town.
Ambitious Turnus in the press appears,
And, aggravating crimes, augments their fears;
Proclaims his private injuries aloud,
A solemn promise made, and disavow'd;
A foreign son is sought, and a mix'd mungril brood.
Then they, whose mothers, frantic with their fear,
In woods and wilds the flags of Bacchus bear,
And lead his dances with dishevel'd hair,
Increase the clamor, and the war demand,
(Such was Amata's interest in the land,)
Against the public sanctions of the peace,
Against all omens of their ill success.
With fates averse, the rout in arms resort,
To force their monarch, and insult the court.
But, like a rock unmov'd, a rock that braves
The raging tempest and the rising waves-
Propp'd on himself he stands; his solid sides
Wash off the seaweeds, and the sounding tides-
So stood the pious prince, unmov'd, and long
Sustain'd the madness of the noisy throng.
But, when he found that Juno's pow'r prevail'd,
And all the methods of cool counsel fail'd,
He calls the gods to witness their offense,
Disclaims the war, asserts his innocence.
"Hurried by fate," he cries, "and borne before
A furious wind, we have the faithful shore.
O more than madmen! you yourselves shall bear
The guilt of blood and sacrilegious war:
Thou, Turnus, shalt atone it by thy fate,
And pray to Heav'n for peace, but pray too late.
For me, my stormy voyage at an end,
I to the port of death securely tend.
The fun'ral pomp which to your kings you pay,
Is all I want, and all you take away."
He said no more, but, in his walls confin'd,
Shut out the woes which he too well divin'd
Nor with the rising storm would vainly strive,
But left the helm, and let the vessel drive.

A solemn custom was observ'd of old,
Which Latium held, and now the Romans hold,
Their standard when in fighting fields they rear
Against the fierce Hyrcanians, or declare
The Scythian, Indian, or Arabian war;
Or from the boasting Parthians would regain
Their eagles, lost in Carrhae's bloody plain.
Two gates of steel (the name of Mars they bear,
And still are worship'd with religious fear)
Before his temple stand: the dire abode,
And the fear'd issues of the furious god,
Are fenc'd with brazen bolts; without the gates,
The wary guardian Janus doubly waits.
Then, when the sacred senate votes the wars,
The Roman consul their decree declares,
And in his robes the sounding gates unbars.
The youth in military shouts arise,
And the loud trumpets break the yielding skies.
These rites, of old by sov'reign princes us'd,
Were the king's office; but the king refus'd,
Deaf to their cries, nor would the gates unbar
Of sacred peace, or loose th' imprison'd war;
But hid his head, and, safe from loud alarms,
Abhorr'd the wicked ministry of arms.
Then heav'n's imperious queen shot down from high:
At her approach the brazen hinges fly;
The gates are forc'd, and ev'ry falling bar;
And, like a tempest, issues out the war.

The peaceful cities of th' Ausonian shore,
Lull'd in their ease, and undisturb'd before,
Are all on fire; and some, with studious care,
Their restiff steeds in sandy plains prepare;
Some their soft limbs in painful marches try,
And war is all their wish, and arms the gen'ral cry.
Part scour the rusty shields with seam; and part
New grind the blunted ax, and point the dart:
With joy they view the waving ensigns fly,
And hear the trumpet's clangor pierce the sky.
Five cities forge their arms: th' Atinian pow'rs,
Antemnae, Tibur with her lofty tow'rs,
Ardea the proud, the Crustumerian town:
All these of old were places of renown.
Some hammer helmets for the fighting field;
Some twine young sallows to support the shield;
The croslet some, and some the cuishes mold,
With silver plated, and with ductile gold.
The rustic honors of the scythe and share
Give place to swords and plumes, the pride of war.
Old fauchions are new temper'd in the fires;
The sounding trumpet ev'ry soul inspires.
The word is giv'n; with eager speed they lace
The shining headpiece, and the shield embrace.
The neighing steeds are to the chariot tied;
The trusty weapon sits on ev'ry side.

And now the mighty labor is begun
Ye Muses, open all your Helicon.
Sing you the chiefs that sway'd th' Ausonian land,
Their arms, and armies under their command;
What warriors in our ancient clime were bred;
What soldiers follow'd, and what heroes led.
For well you know, and can record alone,
What fame to future times conveys but darkly down.
Mezentius first appear'd upon the plain:
Scorn sate upon his brows, and sour disdain,
Defying earth and heav'n. Etruria lost,
He brings to Turnus' aid his baffled host.
The charming Lausus, full of youthful fire,
Rode in the rank, and next his sullen sire;
To Turnus only second in the grace
Of manly mien, and features of the face.
A skilful horseman, and a huntsman bred,
With fates averse a thousand men he led:
His sire unworthy of so brave a son;
Himself well worthy of a happier throne.

Next Aventinus drives his chariot round
The Latian plains, with palms and laurels crown'd.
Proud of his steeds, he smokes along the field;
His father's hydra fills his ample shield:
A hundred serpents hiss about the brims;
The son of Hercules he justly seems
By his broad shoulders and gigantic limbs;
Of heav'nly part, and part of earthly blood,
A mortal woman mixing with a god.
For strong Alcides, after he had slain
The triple Geryon, drove from conquer'd Spain
His captive herds; and, thence in triumph led,
On Tuscan Tiber's flow'ry banks they fed.
Then on Mount Aventine the son of Jove
The priestess Rhea found, and forc'd to love.
For arms, his men long piles and jav'lins bore;
And poles with pointed steel their foes in battle gore.
Like Hercules himself his son appears,
In salvage pomp; a lion's hide he wears;
About his shoulders hangs the shaggy skin;
The teeth and gaping jaws severely grin.
Thus, like the god his father, homely dress'd,
He strides into the hall, a horrid guest.

Then two twin brothers from fair Tibur came,
(Which from their brother Tiburs took the name,)
Fierce Coras and Catillus, void of fear:
Arm'd Argive horse they led, and in the front appear.
Like cloud-born Centaurs, from the mountain's height
With rapid course descending to the fight;
They rush along; the rattling woods give way;
The branches bend before their sweepy sway.

Nor was Praeneste's founder wanting there,
Whom fame reports the son of Mulciber:
Found in the fire, and foster'd in the plains,
A shepherd and a king at once he reigns,
And leads to Turnus' aid his country swains.
His own Praeneste sends a chosen band,
With those who plow Saturnia's Gabine land;
Besides the succor which cold Anien yields,
The rocks of Hernicus, and dewy fields,
Anagnia fat, and Father Amasene-
A num'rous rout, but all of naked men:
Nor arms they wear, nor swords and bucklers wield,
Nor drive the chariot thro' the dusty field,
But whirl from leathern slings huge balls of lead,
And spoils of yellow wolves adorn their head;
The left foot naked, when they march to fight,
But in a bull's raw hide they sheathe the right.
Messapus next, (great Neptune was his sire,)
Secure of steel, and fated from the fire,
In pomp appears, and with his ardor warms
A heartless train, unexercis'd in arms:
The just Faliscans he to battle brings,
And those who live where Lake Ciminia springs;
And where Feronia's grove and temple stands,
Who till Fescennian or Flavinian lands.
All these in order march, and marching sing
The warlike actions of their sea-born king;
Like a long team of snowy swans on high,
Which clap their wings, and cleave the liquid sky,
When, homeward from their wat'ry pastures borne,
They sing, and Asia's lakes their notes return.
Not one who heard their music from afar,
Would think these troops an army train'd to war,
But flocks of fowl, that, when the tempests roar,
With their hoarse gabbling seek the silent shore.

Then Clausus came, who led a num'rous band
Of troops embodied from the Sabine land,
And, in himself alone, an army brought.
'T was he, the noble Claudian race begot,
The Claudian race, ordain'd, in times to come,
To share the greatness of imperial Rome.
He led the Cures forth, of old renown,
Mutuscans from their olive-bearing town,
And all th' Eretian pow'rs; besides a band
That follow'd from Velinum's dewy land,
And Amiternian troops, of mighty fame,
And mountaineers, that from Severus came,
And from the craggy cliffs of Tetrica,
And those where yellow Tiber takes his way,
And where Himella's wanton waters play.
Casperia sends her arms, with those that lie
By Fabaris, and fruitful Foruli:
The warlike aids of Horta next appear,
And the cold Nursians come to close the rear,
Mix'd with the natives born of Latine blood,
Whom Allia washes with her fatal flood.
Not thicker billows beat the Libyan main,
When pale Orion sets in wintry rain;
Nor thicker harvests on rich Hermus rise,
Or Lycian fields, when Phoebus burns the skies,
Than stand these troops: their bucklers ring around;
Their trampling turns the turf, and shakes the solid ground.

High in his chariot then Halesus came,
A foe by birth to Troy's unhappy name:
From Agamemnon born- to Turnus' aid
A thousand men the youthful hero led,
Who till the Massic soil, for wine renown'd,
And fierce Auruncans from their hilly ground,
And those who live by Sidicinian shores,
And where with shoaly fords Vulturnus roars,
Cales' and Osca's old inhabitants,
And rough Saticulans, inur'd to wants:
Light demi-lances from afar they throw,
Fasten'd with leathern thongs, to gall the foe.
Short crooked swords in closer fight they wear;
And on their warding arm light bucklers bear.

Nor Oebalus, shalt thou be left unsung,
From nymph Semethis and old Telon sprung,
Who then in Teleboan Capri reign'd;
But that short isle th' ambitious youth disdain'd,
And o'er Campania stretch'd his ample sway,
Where swelling Sarnus seeks the Tyrrhene sea;
O'er Batulum, and where Abella sees,
From her high tow'rs, the harvest of her trees.
And these (as was the Teuton use of old)
Wield brazen swords, and brazen bucklers hold;
Sling weighty stones, when from afar they fight;
Their casques are cork, a covering thick and light.

Next these in rank, the warlike Ufens went,
And led the mountain troops that Nursia sent.
The rude Equicolae his rule obey'd;
Hunting their sport, and plund'ring was their trade.
In arms they plow'd, to battle still prepar'd:
Their soil was barren, and their hearts were hard.

Umbro the priest the proud Marrubians led,
By King Archippus sent to Turnus' aid,
And peaceful olives crown'd his hoary head.
His wand and holy words, the viper's rage,
And venom'd wounds of serpents could assuage.
He, when he pleas'd with powerful juice to steep
Their temples, shut their eyes in pleasing sleep.
But vain were Marsian herbs, and magic art,
To cure the wound giv'n by the Dardan dart:
Yet his untimely fate th' Angitian woods
In sighs remurmur'd to the Fucine floods.

The son of fam'd Hippolytus was there,
Fam'd as his sire, and, as his mother, fair;
Whom in Egerian groves Aricia bore,
And nurs'd his youth along the marshy shore,
Where great Diana's peaceful altars flame,
In fruitful fields; and Virbius was his name.
Hippolytus, as old records have said,
Was by his stepdam sought to share her bed;
But, when no female arts his mind could move,
She turn'd to furious hate her impious love.
Torn by wild horses on the sandy shore,
Another's crimes th' unhappy hunter bore,
Glutting his father's eyes with guiltless gore.
But chaste Diana, who his death deplor'd,
With Aesculapian herbs his life restor'd.
Then Jove, who saw from high, with just disdain,
The dead inspir'd with vital breath again,
Struck to the center, with his flaming dart,
Th' unhappy founder of the godlike art.
But Trivia kept in secret shades alone
Her care, Hippolytus, to fate unknown;
And call'd him Virbius in th' Egerian grove,
Where then he liv'd obscure, but safe from Jove.
For this, from Trivia's temple and her wood
Are coursers driv'n, who shed their master's blood,
Affrighted by the monsters of the flood.
His son, the second Virbius, yet retain'd
His father's art, and warrior steeds he rein'd.

Amid the troops, and like the leading god,
High o'er the rest in arms the graceful Turnus rode:
A triple of plumes his crest adorn'd,
On which with belching flames Chimaera burn'd:
The more the kindled combat rises high'r,
The more with fury burns the blazing fire.
Fair Io grac'd his shield; but Io now
With horns exalted stands, and seems to low-
A noble charge! Her keeper by her side,
To watch her walks, his hundred eyes applied;
And on the brims her sire, the wat'ry god,
Roll'd from a silver urn his crystal flood.
A cloud of foot succeeds, and fills the fields
With swords, and pointed spears, and clatt'ring shields;
Of Argives, and of old Sicanian bands,
And those who plow the rich Rutulian lands;
Auruncan youth, and those Sacrana yields,
And the proud Labicans, with painted shields,
And those who near Numician streams reside,
And those whom Tiber's holy forests hide,
Or Circe's hills from the main land divide;
Where Ufens glides along the lowly lands,
Or the black water of Pomptina stands.

Last, from the Volscians fair Camilla came,
And led her warlike troops, a warrior dame;
Unbred to spinning, in the loom unskill'd,
She chose the nobler Pallas of the field.
Mix'd with the first, the fierce virago fought,
Sustain'd the toils of arms, the danger sought,
Outstripp'd the winds in speed upon the plain,
Flew o'er the fields, nor hurt the bearded grain:
She swept the seas, and, as she skimm'd along,
Her flying feet unbath'd on billows hung.
Men, boys, and women, stupid with surprise,
Where'er she passes, fix their wond'ring eyes:
Longing they look, and, gaping at the sight,
Devour her o'er and o'er with vast delight;
Her purple habit sits with such a grace
On her smooth shoulders, and so suits her face;
Her head with ringlets of her hair is crown'd,
And in a golden caul the curls are bound.
She shakes her myrtle jav'lin; and, behind,
Her Lycian quiver dances in the wind.





When Turnus had assembled all his pow'rs,
His standard planted on Laurentum's tow'rs;
When now the sprightly trumpet, from afar,
Had giv'n the signal of approaching war,
Had rous'd the neighing steeds to scour the fields,
While the fierce riders clatter'd on their shields;
Trembling with rage, the Latian youth prepare
To join th' allies, and headlong rush to war.
Fierce Ufens, and Messapus, led the crowd,
With bold Mezentius, who blasphem'd aloud.
These thro' the country took their wasteful course,
The fields to forage, and to gather force.
Then Venulus to Diomede they send,
To beg his aid Ausonia to defend,
Declare the common danger, and inform
The Grecian leader of the growing storm:
Aeneas, landed on the Latian coast,
With banish'd gods, and with a baffled host,
Yet now aspir'd to conquest of the state,
And claim'd a title from the gods and fate;
What num'rous nations in his quarrel came,
And how they spread his formidable name.
What he design'd, what mischief might arise,
If fortune favor'd his first enterprise,
Was left for him to weigh, whose equal fears,
And common interest, was involv'd in theirs.

While Turnus and th' allies thus urge the war,
The Trojan, floating in a flood of care,
Beholds the tempest which his foes prepare.
This way and that he turns his anxious mind;
Thinks, and rejects the counsels he design'd;
Explores himself in vain, in ev'ry part,
And gives no rest to his distracted heart.
So, when the sun by day, or moon by night,
Strike on the polish'd brass their trembling light,
The glitt'ring species here and there divide,
And cast their dubious beams from side to side;
Now on the walls, now on the pavement play,
And to the ceiling flash the glaring day.

'T was night; and weary nature lull'd asleep
The birds of air, and fishes of the deep,
And beasts, and mortal men. The Trojan chief
Was laid on Tiber's banks, oppress'd with grief,
And found in silent slumber late relief.
Then, thro' the shadows of the poplar wood,
Arose the father of the Roman flood;
An azure robe was o'er his body spread,
A wreath of shady reeds adorn'd his head:
Thus, manifest to sight, the god appear'd,
And with these pleasing words his sorrow cheer'd:
"Undoubted offspring of ethereal race,
O long expected in this promis'd place!
Who thro' the foes hast borne thy banish'd gods,
Restor'd them to their hearths, and old abodes;
This is thy happy home, the clime where fate
Ordains thee to restore the Trojan state.
Fear not! The war shall end in lasting peace,
And all the rage of haughty Juno cease.
And that this nightly vision may not seem
Th' effect of fancy, or an idle dream,
A sow beneath an oak shall lie along,
All white herself, and white her thirty young.
When thirty rolling years have run their race,
Thy son Ascanius, on this empty space,
Shall build a royal town, of lasting fame,
Which from this omen shall receive the name.
Time shall approve the truth. For what remains,
And how with sure success to crown thy pains,
With patience next attend. A banish'd band,
Driv'n with Evander from th' Arcadian land,
Have planted here, and plac'd on high their walls;
Their town the founder Pallanteum calls,
Deriv'd from Pallas, his great-grandsire's name:
But the fierce Latians old possession claim,
With war infesting the new colony.
These make thy friends, and on their aid rely.
To thy free passage I submit my streams.
Wake, son of Venus, from thy pleasing dreams;
And, when the setting stars are lost in day,
To Juno's pow'r thy just devotion pay;
With sacrifice the wrathful queen appease:
Her pride at length shall fall, her fury cease.
When thou return'st victorious from the war,
Perform thy vows to me with grateful care.
The god am I, whose yellow water flows
Around these fields, and fattens as it goes:
Tiber my name; among the rolling floods
Renown'd on earth, esteem'd among the gods.
This is my certain seat. In times to come,
My waves shall wash the walls of mighty Rome."

He said, and plung'd below. While yet he spoke,
His dream Aeneas and his sleep forsook.
He rose, and looking up, beheld the skies
With purple blushing, and the day arise.
Then water in his hollow palm he took
From Tiber's flood, and thus the pow'rs bespoke:
"Laurentian nymphs, by whom the streams are fed,
And Father Tiber, in thy sacred bed
Receive Aeneas, and from danger keep.
Whatever fount, whatever holy deep,
Conceals thy wat'ry stores; where'er they rise,
And, bubbling from below, salute the skies;
Thou, king of horned floods, whose plenteous urn
Suffices fatness to the fruitful corn,
For this thy kind compassion of our woes,
Shalt share my morning song and ev'ning vows.
But, O be present to thy people's aid,
And firm the gracious promise thou hast made!"
Thus having said, two galleys from his stores,
With care he chooses, mans, and fits with oars.
Now on the shore the fatal swine is found.
Wondrous to tell!- She lay along the ground:
Her well-fed offspring at her udders hung;
She white herself, and white her thirty young.
Aeneas takes the mother and her brood,
And all on Juno's altar are bestow'd.

The foll'wing night, and the succeeding day,
Propitious Tiber smooth'd his wat'ry way:
He roll'd his river back, and pois'd he stood,
A gentle swelling, and a peaceful flood.
The Trojans mount their ships; they put from shore,
Borne on the waves, and scarcely dip an oar.
Shouts from the land give omen to their course,
And the pitch'd vessels glide with easy force.
The woods and waters wonder at the gleam
Of shields, and painted ships that stem the stream.
One summer's night and one whole day they pass
Betwixt the greenwood shades, and cut the liquid glass.
The fiery sun had finish'd half his race,
Look'd back, and doubted in the middle space,
When they from far beheld the rising tow'rs,
The tops of sheds, and shepherds' lowly bow'rs,
Thin as they stood, which, then of homely clay,
Now rise in marble, from the Roman sway.
These cots (Evander's kingdom, mean and poor)
The Trojan saw, and turn'd his ships to shore.
'T was on a solemn day: th' Arcadian states,
The king and prince, without the city gates,
Then paid their off'rings in a sacred grove
To Hercules, the warrior son of Jove.
Thick clouds of rolling smoke involve the skies,
And fat of entrails on his altar fries.

But, when they saw the ships that stemm'd the flood,
And glitter'd thro' the covert of the wood,
They rose with fear, and left th' unfinish'd feast,
Till dauntless Pallas reassur'd the rest
To pay the rites. Himself without delay
A jav'lin seiz'd, and singly took his way;
Then gain'd a rising ground, and call'd from far:
"Resolve me, strangers, whence, and what you are;
Your bus'ness here; and bring you peace or war?"
High on the stern Aeneas his stand,
And held a branch of olive in his hand,
While thus he spoke: "The Phrygians' arms you see,
Expell'd from Troy, provok'd in Italy
By Latian foes, with war unjustly made;
At first affianc'd, and at last betray'd.
This message bear: 'The Trojans and their chief
Bring holy peace, and beg the king's relief.'
Struck with so great a name, and all on fire,
The youth replies: "Whatever you require,
Your fame exacts. Upon our shores descend.
A welcome guest, and, what you wish, a friend."
He said, and, downward hasting to the strand,
Embrac'd the stranger prince, and join'd his hand.

Conducted to the grove, Aeneas broke
The silence first, and thus the king bespoke:
"Best of the Greeks, to whom, by fate's command,
I bear these peaceful branches in my hand,
Undaunted I approach you, tho' I know
Your birth is Grecian, and your land my foe;
From Atreus tho' your ancient lineage came,
And both the brother kings your kindred claim;
Yet, my self-conscious worth, your high renown,
Your virtue, thro' the neighb'ring nations blown,
Our fathers' mingled blood, Apollo's voice,
Have led me hither, less by need than choice.
Our founder Dardanus, as fame has sung,
And Greeks acknowledge, from Electra sprung:
Electra from the loins of Atlas came;
Atlas, whose head sustains the starry frame.
Your sire is Mercury, whom long before
On cold Cyllene's top fair Maia bore.
Maia the fair, on fame if we rely,
Was Atlas' daughter, who sustains the sky.
Thus from one common source our streams divide;
Ours is the Trojan, yours th' Arcadian side.
Rais'd by these hopes, I sent no news before,
Nor ask'd your leave, nor did your faith implore;
But come, without a pledge, my own ambassador.
The same Rutulians, who with arms pursue
The Trojan race, are equal foes to you.
Our host expell'd, what farther force can stay
The victor troops from universal sway?
Then will they stretch their pow'r athwart the land,
And either sea from side to side command.
Receive our offer'd faith, and give us thine;
Ours is a gen'rous and experienc'd line:
We want not hearts nor bodies for the war;
In council cautious, and in fields we dare."

He said; and while spoke, with piercing eyes
Evander view'd the man with vast surprise,
Pleas'd with his action, ravish'd with his face:
Then answer'd briefly, with a royal grace:
"O valiant leader of the Trojan line,
In whom the features of thy father shine,
How I recall Anchises! how I see
His motions, mien, and all my friend, in thee!
Long tho' it be, 't is fresh within my mind,
When Priam to his sister's court design'd
A welcome visit, with a friendly stay,
And thro' th' Arcadian kingdom took his way.
Then, past a boy, the callow down began
To shade my chin, and call me first a man.
I saw the shining train with vast delight,
And Priam's goodly person pleas'd my sight:
But great Anchises, far above the rest,
With awful wonder fir'd my youthful breast.
I long'd to join in friendship's holy bands
Our mutual hearts, and plight our mutual hands.
I first accosted him: I sued, I sought,
And, with a loving force, to Pheneus brought.
He gave me, when at length constrain'd to go,
A Lycian quiver and a Gnossian bow,
A vest embroider'd, glorious to behold,
And two rich bridles, with their bits of gold,
Which my son's coursers in obedience hold.
The league you ask, I offer, as your right;
And, when to-morrow's sun reveals the light,
With swift supplies you shall be sent away.
Now celebrate with us this solemn day,
Whose holy rites admit no long delay.
Honor our annual feast; and take your seat,
With friendly welcome, at a homely treat."
Thus having said, the bowls (remov'd for fear)
The youths replac'd, and soon restor'd the cheer.
On sods of turf he set the soldiers round:
A maple throne, rais'd higher from the ground,
Receiv'd the Trojan chief; and, o'er the bed,
A lion's shaggy hide for ornament they spread.
The loaves were serv'd in canisters; the wine
In bowls; the priest renew'd the rites divine:
Broil'd entrails are their food, and beef's continued chine.

But when the rage of hunger was repress'd,
Thus spoke Evander to his royal guest:
"These rites, these altars, and this feast, O king,
From no vain fears or superstition spring,
Or blind devotion, or from blinder chance,
Or heady zeal, or brutal ignorance;
But, sav'd from danger, with a grateful sense,
The labors of a god we recompense.
See, from afar, yon rock that mates the sky,
About whose feet such heaps of rubbish lie;
Such indigested ruin; bleak and bare,
How desart now it stands, expos'd in air!
'T was once a robber's den, inclos'd around
With living stone, and deep beneath the ground.
The monster Cacus, more than half a beast,
This hold, impervious to the sun, possess'd.
The pavement ever foul with human gore;
Heads, and their mangled members, hung the door.
Vulcan this plague begot; and, like his sire,
Black clouds he belch'd, and flakes of livid fire.
Time, long expected, eas'd us of our load,
And brought the needful presence of a god.
Th' avenging force of Hercules, from Spain,
Arriv'd in triumph, from Geryon slain:
Thrice liv'd the giant, and thrice liv'd in vain.
His prize, the lowing herds, Alcides drove
Near Tiber's bank, to graze the shady grove.
Allur'd with hope of plunder, and intent
By force to rob, by fraud to circumvent,
The brutal Cacus, as by chance they stray'd,
Four oxen thence, and four fair kine convey'd;
And, lest the printed footsteps might be seen,
He dragg'd 'em backwards to his rocky den.
The tracks averse a lying notice gave,
And led the searcher backward from the cave.

"Meantime the herdsman hero shifts his place,
To find fresh pasture and untrodden grass.
The beasts, who miss'd their mates, fill'd all around
With bellowings, and the rocks restor'd the sound.
One heifer, who had heard her love complain,
Roar'd from the cave, and made the project vain.
Alcides found the fraud; with rage he shook,
And toss'd about his head his knotted oak.
Swift as the winds, or Scythian arrows' flight,
He clomb, with eager haste, th' aerial height.
Then first we saw the monster mend his pace;
Fear his eyes, and paleness in his face,
Confess'd the god's approach. Trembling he springs,
As terror had increas'd his feet with wings;
Nor stay'd for stairs; but down the depth he threw
His body, on his back the door he drew
(The door, a rib of living rock; with pains
His father hew'd it out, and bound with iron chains):
He broke the heavy links, the mountain clos'd,
And bars and levers to his foe oppos'd.
The wretch had hardly made his dungeon fast;
The fierce avenger came with bounding haste;
Survey'd the mouth of the forbidden hold,
And here and there his raging eyes he roll'd.
He gnash'd his teeth; and thrice he compass'd round
With winged speed the circuit of the ground.
Thrice at the cavern's mouth he pull'd in vain,
And, panting, thrice desisted from his pain.
A pointed flinty rock, all bare and black,
Grew gibbous from behind the mountain's back;
Owls, ravens, all ill omens of the night,
Here built their nests, and hither wing'd their flight.
The leaning head hung threat'ning o'er the flood,
And nodded to the left. The hero stood
Adverse, with planted feet, and, from the right,
Tugg'd at the solid stone with all his might.
Thus heav'd, the fix'd foundations of the rock
Gave way; heav'n echo'd at the rattling shock.
Tumbling, it chok'd the flood: on either side
The banks leap backward, and the streams divide;
The sky shrunk upward with unusual dread,
And trembling Tiber div'd beneath his bed.
The court of Cacus stands reveal'd to sight;
The cavern glares with new-admitted light.
So the pent vapors, with a rumbling sound,
Heave from below, and rend the hollow ground;
A sounding flaw succeeds; and, from on high,
The gods with hate beheld the nether sky:
The ghosts repine at violated night,
And curse th' invading sun, and sicken at the sight.
The graceless monster, caught in open day,
Inclos'd, and in despair to fly away,
Howls horrible from underneath, and fills
His hollow palace with unmanly yells.
The hero stands above, and from afar
Plies him with darts, and stones, and distant war.
He, from his nostrils huge mouth, expires
Black clouds of smoke, amidst his father's fires,
Gath'ring, with each repeated blast, the night,
To make uncertain aim, and erring sight.
The wrathful god then plunges from above,
And, where in thickest waves the sparkles drove,
There lights; and wades thro' fumes, and gropes his way,
Half sing'd, half stifled, till he grasps his prey.
The monster, spewing fruitless flames, he found;
He squeez'd his throat; he writh'd his neck around,
And in a knot his crippled members bound;
Then from their sockets tore his burning eyes:
Roll'd on a heap, the breathless robber lies.
The doors, unbarr'd, receive the rushing day,
And thoro' lights disclose the ravish'd prey.
The bulls, redeem'd, breathe open air again.
Next, by the feet, they drag him from his den.
The wond'ring neighborhood, with glad surprise,
Behold his shagged breast, his giant size,
His mouth that flames no more, and his extinguish'd eyes.
From that auspicious day, with rites divine,
We worship at the hero's holy shrine.
Potitius first ordain'd these annual vows:
As priests, were added the Pinarian house,
Who rais'd this altar in the sacred shade,
Where honors, ever due, for ever shall be paid.
For these deserts, and this high virtue shown,
Ye warlike youths, your heads with garlands crown:
Fill high the goblets with a sparkling flood,
And with deep draughts invoke our common god."

This said, a double wreath Evander twin'd,
And poplars black and white his temples bind.
Then brims his ample bowl. With like design
The rest invoke the gods, with sprinkled wine.
Meantime the sun descended from the skies,
And the bright evening star began to rise.
And now the priests, Potitius at their head,
In skins of beasts involv'd, the long procession led;
Held high the flaming tapers in their hands,
As custom had prescrib'd their holy bands;
Then with a second course the tables load,
And with full chargers offer to the god.
The Salii sing, and cense his altars round
With Saban smoke, their heads with poplar bound-
One choir of old, another of the young,
To dance, and bear the burthen of the song.
The lay records the labors, and the praise,
And all th' immortal acts of Hercules:
First, how the mighty babe, when swath'd in bands,
The serpents strangled with his infant hands;
Then, as in years and matchless force he grew,
Th' Oechalian walls, and Trojan, overthrew.
Besides, a thousand hazards they relate,
Procur'd by Juno's and Eurystheus' hate:
"Thy hands, unconquer'd hero, could subdue
The cloud-born Centaurs, and the monster crew:
Nor thy resistless arm the bull withstood,
Nor he, the roaring terror of the wood.
The triple porter of the Stygian seat,
With lolling tongue, lay fawning at thy feet,
And, seiz'd with fear, forgot his mangled meat.
Th' infernal waters trembled at thy sight;
Thee, god, no face of danger could affright;
Not huge Typhoeus, nor th' unnumber'd snake,
Increas'd with hissing heads, in Lerna's lake.
Hail, Jove's undoubted son! an added grace
To heav'n and the great author of thy race!
Receive the grateful off'rings which we pay,
And smile propitious on thy solemn day!"
In numbers thus they sung; above the rest,
The den and death of Cacus crown the feast.
The woods to hollow vales convey the sound,
The vales to hills, and hills the notes rebound.
The rites perform'd, the cheerful train retire.

Betwixt young Pallas and his aged sire,
The Trojan pass'd, the city to survey,
And pleasing talk beguil'd the tedious way.
The stranger cast around his curious eyes,
New objects viewing still, with new surprise;
With greedy joy enquires of various things,
And acts and monuments of ancient kings.
Then thus the founder of the Roman tow'rs:
"These woods were first the seat of sylvan pow'rs,
Of Nymphs and Fauns, and salvage men, who took
Their birth from trunks of trees and stubborn oak.
Nor laws they knew, nor manners, nor the care
Of lab'ring oxen, or the shining share,
Nor arts of gain, nor what they gain'd to spare.
Their exercise the chase; the running flood
Supplied their thirst, the trees supplied their food.
Then Saturn came, who fled the pow'r of Jove,
Robb'd of his realms, and banish'd from above.
The men, dispers'd on hills, to towns he brought,
And laws ordain'd, and civil customs taught,
And Latium call'd the land where safe he lay
From his unduteous son, and his usurping sway.
With his mild empire, peace and plenty came;
And hence the golden times deriv'd their name.
A more degenerate and discolor'd age
Succeeded this, with avarice and rage.
Th' Ausonians then, and bold Sicanians came;
And Saturn's empire often chang'd the name.
Then kings, gigantic Tybris, and the rest,
With arbitrary sway the land oppress'd:
For Tiber's flood was Albula before,
Till, from the tyrant's fate, his name it bore.
I last arriv'd, driv'n from my native home
By fortune's pow'r, and fate's resistless doom.
Long toss'd on seas, I sought this happy land,
Warn'd by my mother nymph, and call'd by Heav'n's command."

Thus, walking on, he spoke, and shew'd the gate,
Since call'd Carmental by the Roman state;
Where stood an altar, sacred to the name
Of old Carmenta, the prophetic dame,
Who to her son foretold th' Aenean race,
Sublime in fame, and Rome's imperial place:
Then shews the forest, which, in after times,
Fierce Romulus for perpetrated crimes
A sacred refuge made; with this, the shrine
Where Pan below the rock had rites divine:
Then tells of Argus' death, his murder'd guest,
Whose grave and tomb his innocence attest.
Thence, to the steep Tarpeian rock he leads;
Now roof'd with gold, then thatch'd with homely reeds.
A reverent fear (such superstition reigns
Among the rude) ev'n then possess'd the swains.
Some god, they knew- what god, they could not tell-
Did there amidst the sacred horror dwell.
Th' Arcadians thought him Jove; and said they saw
The mighty Thund'rer with majestic awe,
Who took his shield, and dealt his bolts around,
And scatter'd tempests on the teeming ground.
Then saw two heaps of ruins, (once they stood
Two stately towns, on either side the flood,)
Saturnia's and Janicula's remains;
And either place the founder's name retains.
Discoursing thus together, they resort
Where poor Evander kept his country court.
They view'd the ground of Rome's litigious hall;
(Once oxen low'd, where now the lawyers bawl;)
Then, stooping, thro' the narrow gate they press'd,
When thus the king bespoke his Trojan guest:
"Mean as it is, this palace, and this door,
Receiv'd Alcides, then a conqueror.
Dare to be poor; accept our homely food,
Which feasted him, and emulate a god."
Then underneath a lowly roof he led
The weary prince, and laid him on a bed;
The stuffing leaves, with hides of bears o'erspread.
Now Night had shed her silver dews around,
And with her sable wings embrac'd the ground,
When love's fair goddess, anxious for her son,
(New tumults rising, and new wars begun,)
Couch'd with her husband in his golden bed,
With these alluring words invokes his aid;
And, that her pleasing speech his mind may move,
Inspires each accent with the charms of love:
"While cruel fate conspir'd with Grecian pow'rs,
To level with the ground the Trojan tow'rs,
I ask'd not aid th' unhappy to restore,
Nor did the succor of thy skill implore;
Nor urg'd the labors of my lord in vain,
A sinking empire longer to sustain,
Tho'much I ow'd to Priam's house, and more
The dangers of Aeneas did deplore.
But now, by Jove's command, and fate's decree,
His race is doom'd to reign in Italy:
With humble suit I beg thy needful art,
O still propitious pow'r, that rules my heart!
A mother kneels a suppliant for her son.
By Thetis and Aurora thou wert won
To forge impenetrable shields, and grace
With fated arms a less illustrious race.
Behold, what haughty nations are combin'd
Against the relics of the Phrygian kind,
With fire and sword my people to destroy,
And conquer Venus twice, in conqu'ring Troy."
She said; and straight her arms, of snowy hue,
About her unresolving husband threw.
Her soft embraces soon infuse desire;
His bones and marrow sudden warmth inspire;
And all the godhead feels the wonted fire.
Not half so swift the rattling thunder flies,
Or forky lightnings flash along the skies.
The goddess, proud of her successful wiles,
And conscious of her form, in secret smiles.

Then thus the pow'r, obnoxious to her charms,
Panting, and half dissolving in her arms:
"Why seek you reasons for a cause so just,
Or your own beauties or my love distrust?
Long since, had you requir'd my helpful hand,
Th' artificer and art you might command,
To labor arms for Troy: nor Jove, nor fate,
Confin'd their empire to so short a date.
And, if you now desire new wars to wage,
My skill I promise, and my pains engage.
Whatever melting metals can conspire,
Or breathing bellows, or the forming fire,
Is freely yours: your anxious fears remove,
And think no task is difficult to love."
Trembling he spoke; and, eager of her charms,
He snatch'd the willing goddess to his arms;
Till in her lap infus'd, he lay possess'd
Of full desire, and sunk to pleasing rest.
Now when the Night her middle race had rode,
And his first slumber had refresh'd the god-
The time when early housewives leave the bed;
When living embers on the hearth they spread,
Supply the lamp, and call the maids to rise-
With yawning mouths, and with half-open'd eyes,
They ply the distaff by the winking light,
And to their daily labor add the night:
Thus frugally they earn their children's bread,
And uncorrupted keep the nuptial bed-
Not less concern'd, nor at a later hour,
Rose from his downy couch the forging pow'r.

Sacred to Vulcan's name, an isle there lay,
Betwixt Sicilia's coasts and Lipare,
Rais'd high on smoking rocks; and, deep below,
In hollow caves the fires of Aetna glow.
The Cyclops here their heavy hammers deal;
Loud strokes, and hissings of tormented steel,
Are heard around; the boiling waters roar,
And smoky flames thro' fuming tunnels soar.
Hether the Father of the Fire, by night,
Thro' the brown air precipitates his flight.
On their eternal anvils here he found
The brethren beating, and the blows go round.
A load of pointless thunder now there lies
Before their hands, to ripen for the skies:
These darts, for angry Jove, they daily cast;
Consum'd on mortals with prodigious waste.
Three rays of writhen rain, of fire three more,
Of winged southern winds and cloudy store
As many parts, the dreadful mixture frame;
And fears are added, and avenging flame.
Inferior ministers, for Mars, repair
His broken axletrees and blunted war,
And send him forth again with furbish'd arms,
To wake the lazy war with trumpets' loud alarms.
The rest refresh the scaly snakes that fold
The shield of Pallas, and renew their gold.
Full on the crest the Gorgon's head they place,
With eyes that roll in death, and with distorted face.

"My sons," said Vulcan, "set your tasks aside;
Your strength and master-skill must now be tried.
Arms for a hero forge; arms that require
Your force, your speed, and all your forming fire."
He said. They set their former work aside,
And their new toils with eager haste divide.
A flood of molten silver, brass, and gold,
And deadly steel, in the large furnace roll'd;
Of this, their artful hands a shield prepare,
Alone sufficient to sustain the war.
Sev'n orbs within a spacious round they close:
One stirs the fire, and one the bellows blows.
The hissing steel is in the smithy drown'd;
The grot with beaten anvils groans around.
By turns their arms advance, in equal time;
By turns their hands descend, and hammers chime.
They turn the glowing mass with crooked tongs;
The fiery work proceeds, with rustic songs.

While, at the Lemnian god's command, they urge
Their labors thus, and ply th' Aeolian forge,
The cheerful morn salutes Evander's eyes,
And songs of chirping birds invite to rise.
He leaves his lowly bed: his buskins meet
Above his ankles; sandals sheathe his feet:
He sets his trusty sword upon his side,
And o'er his shoulder throws a panther's hide.
Two menial dogs before their master press'd.
Thus clad, and guarded thus, he seeks his kingly guest.
Mindful of promis'd aid, he mends his pace,
But meets Aeneas in the middle space.
Young Pallas did his father's steps attend,
And true Achates waited on his friend.
They join their hands; a secret seat they choose;
Th' Arcadian first their former talk renews:
"Undaunted prince, I never can believe
The Trojan empire lost, while you survive.
Command th' assistance of a faithful friend;
But feeble are the succors I can send.
Our narrow kingdom here the Tiber bounds;
That other side the Latian state surrounds,
Insults our walls, and wastes our fruitful grounds.
But mighty nations I prepare, to join
Their arms with yours, and aid your just design.
You come, as by your better genius sent,
And fortune seems to favor your intent.
Not far from hence there stands a hilly town,
Of ancient building, and of high renown,
Torn from the Tuscans by the Lydian race,
Who gave the name of Caere to the place,
Once Agyllina call'd. It flourish'd long,
In pride of wealth and warlike people strong,
Till curs'd Mezentius, in a fatal hour,
Assum'd the crown, with arbitrary pow'r.
What words can paint those execrable times,
The subjects' suff'rings, and the tyrant's crimes!
That blood, those murthers, O ye gods, replace
On his own head, and on his impious race!
The living and the dead at his command
Were coupled, face to face, and hand to hand,
Till, chok'd with stench, in loath'd embraces tied,
The ling'ring wretches pin'd away and died.
Thus plung'd in ills, and meditating more-
The people's patience, tir'd, no longer bore
The raging monster; but with arms beset
His house, and vengeance and destruction threat.
They fire his palace: while the flame ascends,
They force his guards, and execute his friends.
He cleaves the crowd, and, favor'd by the night,
To Turnus' friendly court directs his flight.
By just revenge the Tuscans set on fire,
With arms, their king to punishment require:
Their num'rous troops, now muster'd on the strand,
My counsel shall submit to your command.
Their navy swarms upon the coasts; they cry
To hoist their anchors, but the gods deny.
An ancient augur, skill'd in future fate,
With these foreboding words restrains their hate:
'Ye brave in arms, ye Lydian blood, the flow'r
Of Tuscan youth, and choice of all their pow'r,
Whom just revenge against Mezentius arms,
To seek your tyrant's death by lawful arms;
Know this: no native of our land may lead
This pow'rful people; seek a foreign head.'
Aw'd with these words, in camps they still abide,
And wait with longing looks their promis'd guide.
Tarchon, the Tuscan chief, to me has sent
Their crown, and ev'ry regal ornament:
The people join their own with his desire;
And all my conduct, as their king, require.
But the chill blood that creeps within my veins,
And age, and listless limbs unfit for pains,
And a soul conscious of its own decay,
Have forc'd me to refuse imperial sway.
My Pallas were more fit to mount the throne,
And should, but he's a Sabine mother's son,
And half a native; but, in you, combine
A manly vigor, and a foreign line.
Where Fate and smiling Fortune shew the way,
Pursue the ready path to sov'reign sway.
The staff of my declining days, my son,
Shall make your good or ill success his own;
In fighting fields from you shall learn to dare,
And serve the hard apprenticeship of war;
Your matchless courage and your conduct view,
And early shall begin t' admire and copy you.
Besides, two hundred horse he shall command;
Tho' few, a warlike and well-chosen band.
These in my name are listed; and my son
As many more has added in his own."

Scarce had he said; Achates and his guest,
With downcast eyes, their silent grief express'd;
Who, short of succors, and in deep despair,
Shook at the dismal prospect of the war.
But his bright mother, from a breaking cloud,
To cheer her issue, thunder'd thrice aloud;
Thrice forky lightning flash'd along the sky,
And Tyrrhene trumpets thrice were heard on high.
Then, gazing up, repeated peals they hear;
And, in a heav'n serene, refulgent arms appear:
Redd'ning the skies, and glitt'ring all around,
The temper'd metals clash, and yield a silver sound.
The rest stood trembling, struck with awe divine;
Aeneas only, conscious to the sign,
Presag'd th' event, and joyful view'd, above,
Th' accomplish'd promise of the Queen of Love.
Then, to th' Arcadian king: "This prodigy
(Dismiss your fear) belongs alone to me.
Heav'n calls me to the war: th' expected sign
Is giv'n of promis'd aid, and arms divine.
My goddess mother, whose indulgent care
Foresaw the dangers of the growing war,
This omen gave, when bright Vulcanian arms,
Fated from force of steel by Stygian charms,
Suspended, shone on high: she then foreshow'd
Approaching fights, and fields to float in blood.
Turnus shall dearly pay for faith forsworn;
And corps, and swords, and shields, on Tiber borne,
Shall choke his flood: now sound the loud alarms;
And, Latian troops, prepare your perjur'd arms."

He said, and, rising from his homely throne,
The solemn rites of Hercules begun,
And on his altars wak'd the sleeping fires;
Then cheerful to his household gods retires;
There offers chosen sheep. Th' Arcadian king
And Trojan youth the same oblations bring.
Next, of his men and ships he makes review;
Draws out the best and ablest of the crew.
Down with the falling stream the refuse run,
To raise with joyful news his drooping son.
Steeds are prepar'd to mount the Trojan band,
Who wait their leader to the Tyrrhene land.
A sprightly courser, fairer than the rest,
The king himself presents his royal guest:
A lion's hide his back and limbs infold,
Precious with studded work, and paws of gold.
Fame thro' the little city spreads aloud
Th' intended march, amid the fearful crowd:
The matrons beat their breasts, dissolve in tears,
And double their devotion in their fears.
The war at hand appears with more affright,
And rises ev'ry moment to the sight.

Then old Evander, with a close embrace,
Strain'd his departing friend; and tears o'erflow his face.
"Would Heav'n," said he, "my strength and youth recall,
Such as I was beneath Praeneste's wall;
Then when I made the foremost foes retire,
And set whole heaps of conquer'd shields on fire;
When Herilus in single fight I slew,
Whom with three lives Feronia did endue;
And thrice I sent him to the Stygian shore,
Till the last ebbing soul return'd no more-
Such if I stood renew'd, not these alarms,
Nor death, should rend me from my Pallas' arms;
Nor proud Mezentius, thus unpunish'd, boast
His rapes and murthers on the Tuscan coast.
Ye gods, and mighty Jove, in pity bring
Relief, and hear a father and a king!
If fate and you reserve these eyes, to see
My son return with peace and victory;
If the lov'd boy shall bless his father's sight;
If we shall meet again with more delight;
Then draw my life in length; let me sustain,
In hopes of his embrace, the worst of pain.
But if your hard decrees- which, O! I dread-
Have doom'd to death his undeserving head;
This, O this very moment, let me die!
While hopes and fears in equal balance lie;
While, yet possess'd of all his youthful charms,
I strain him close within these aged arms;
Before that fatal news my soul shall wound!"
He said, and, swooning, sunk upon the ground.
His servants bore him off, and softly laid
His languish'd limbs upon his homely bed.

The horsemen march; the gates are open'd wide;
Aeneas at their head, Achates by his side.
Next these, the Trojan leaders rode along;
Last follows in the rear th' Arcadian throng.
Young Pallas shone conspicuous o'er the rest;
Gilded his arms, embroider'd was his vest.
So, from the seas, exerts his radiant head
The star by whom the lights of heav'n are led;
Shakes from his rosy locks the pearly dews,
Dispels the darkness, and the day renews.
The trembling wives the walls and turrets crowd,
And follow, with their eyes, the dusty cloud,
Which winds disperse by fits, and shew from far
The blaze of arms, and shields, and shining war.
The troops, drawn up in beautiful array,
O'er heathy plains pursue the ready way.
Repeated peals of shouts are heard around;
The neighing coursers answer to the sound,
And shake with horny hoofs the solid ground.

A greenwood shade, for long religion known,
Stands by the streams that wash the Tuscan town,
Incompass'd round with gloomy hills above,
Which add a holy horror to the grove.
The first inhabitants of Grecian blood,
That sacred forest to Silvanus vow'd,
The guardian of their flocks and fields; and pay
Their due devotions on his annual day.
Not far from hence, along the river's side,
In tents secure, the Tuscan troops abide,
By Tarchon led. Now, from a rising ground,
Aeneas cast his wond'ring eyes around,
And all the Tyrrhene army had in sight,
Stretch'd on the spacious plain from left to right.
Thether his warlike train the Trojan led,
Refresh'd his men, and wearied horses fed.

Meantime the mother goddess, crown'd with charms,
Breaks thro' the clouds, and brings the fated arms.
Within a winding vale she finds her son,
On the cool river's banks, retir'd alone.
She shews her heav'nly form without disguise,
And gives herself to his desiring eyes.
"Behold," she said, "perform'd in ev'ry part,
My promise made, and Vulcan's labor'd art.
Now seek, secure, the Latian enemy,
And haughty Turnus to the field defy."
She said; and, having first her son embrac'd,
The radiant arms beneath an oak she plac'd,
Proud of the gift, he roll'd his greedy sight
Around the work, and gaz'd with vast delight.
He lifts, he turns, he poises, and admires
The crested helm, that vomits radiant fires:
His hands the fatal sword and corslet hold,
One keen with temper'd steel, one stiff with gold:
Both ample, flaming both, and beamy bright;
So shines a cloud, when edg'd with adverse light.
He shakes the pointed spear, and longs to try
The plated cuishes on his manly thigh;
But most admires the shield's mysterious mold,
And Roman triumphs rising on the gold:
For these, emboss'd, the heav'nly smith had wrought
(Not in the rolls of future fate untaught)
The wars in order, and the race divine
Of warriors issuing from the Julian line.
The cave of Mars was dress'd with mossy greens:
There, by the wolf, were laid the martial twins.
Intrepid on her swelling dugs they hung;
The foster dam loll'd out her fawning tongue:
They suck'd secure, while, bending back her head,
She lick'd their tender limbs, and form'd them as they fed.
Not far from thence new Rome appears, with games
Projected for the rape of Sabine dames.
The pit resounds with shrieks; a war succeeds,
For breach of public faith, and unexampled deeds.
Here for revenge the Sabine troops contend;
The Romans there with arms the prey defend.
Wearied with tedious war, at length they cease;
And both the kings and kingdoms plight the peace.
The friendly chiefs before Jove's altar stand,
Both arm'd, with each a charger in his hand:
A fatted sow for sacrifice is led,
With imprecations on the perjur'd head.
Near this, the traitor Metius, stretch'd between
Four fiery steeds, is dragg'd along the green,
By Tullus' doom: the brambles drink his blood,
And his torn limbs are left the vulture's food.
There, Porsena to Rome proud Tarquin brings,
And would by force restore the banish'd kings.
One tyrant for his fellow-tyrant fights;
The Roman youth assert their native rights.
Before the town the Tuscan army lies,
To win by famine, or by fraud surprise.
Their king, half-threat'ning, half-disdaining stood,
While Cocles broke the bridge, and stemm'd the flood.
The captive maids there tempt the raging tide,
Scap'd from their chains, with Cloelia for their guide.
High on a rock heroic Manlius stood,
To guard the temple, and the temple's god.
Then Rome was poor; and there you might behold
The palace thatch'd with straw, now roof'd with gold.
The silver goose before the shining gate
There flew, and, by her cackle, sav'd the state.
She told the Gauls' approach; th' approaching Gauls,
Obscure in night, ascend, and seize the walls.
The gold dissembled well their yellow hair,
And golden chains on their white necks they wear.
Gold are their vests; long Alpine spears they wield,
And their left arm sustains a length of shield.
Hard by, the leaping Salian priests advance;
And naked thro' the streets the mad Luperci dance,
In caps of wool; the targets dropp'd from heav'n.
Here modest matrons, in soft litters driv'n,
To pay their vows in solemn pomp appear,
And odorous gums in their chaste hands they bear.
Far hence remov'd, the Stygian seats are seen;
Pains of the damn'd, and punish'd Catiline
Hung on a rock- the traitor; and, around,
The Furies hissing from the nether ground.
Apart from these, the happy souls he draws,
And Cato's holy ghost dispensing laws.

Betwixt the quarters flows a golden sea;
But foaming surges there in silver play.
The dancing dolphins with their tails divide
The glitt'ring waves, and cut the precious tide.
Amid the main, two mighty fleets engage
Their brazen beaks, oppos'd with equal rage.
Actium surveys the well-disputed prize;
Leucate's wat'ry plain with foamy billows fries.
Young Caesar, on the stern, in armor bright,
Here leads the Romans and their gods to fight:
His beamy temples shoot their flames afar,
And o'er his head is hung the Julian star.
Agrippa seconds him, with prosp'rous gales,
And, with propitious gods, his foes assails:
A naval crown, that binds his manly brows,
The happy fortune of the fight foreshows.
Rang'd on the line oppos'd, Antonius brings
Barbarian aids, and troops of Eastern kings;
Th' Arabians near, and Bactrians from afar,
Of tongues discordant, and a mingled war:
And, rich in gaudy robes, amidst the strife,
His ill fate follows him- th' Egyptian wife.
Moving they fight; with oars and forky prows
The froth is gather'd, and the water glows.
It seems, as if the Cyclades again
Were rooted up, and justled in the main;
Or floating mountains floating mountains meet;
Such is the fierce encounter of the fleet.
Fireballs are thrown, and pointed jav'lins fly;
The fields of Neptune take a purple dye.
The queen herself, amidst the loud alarms,
With cymbals toss'd her fainting soldiers warms-
Fool as she was! who had not yet divin'd
Her cruel fate, nor saw the snakes behind.
Her country gods, the monsters of the sky,
Great Neptune, Pallas, and Love's Queen defy:
The dog Anubis barks, but barks in vain,
Nor longer dares oppose th' ethereal train.
Mars in the middle of the shining shield
Is grav'd, and strides along the liquid field.
The Dirae souse from heav'n with swift descent;
And Discord, dyed in blood, with garments rent,
Divides the prease: her steps Bellona treads,
And shakes her iron rod above their heads.
This seen, Apollo, from his Actian height,
Pours down his arrows; at whose winged flight
The trembling Indians and Egyptians yield,
And soft Sabaeans quit the wat'ry field.
The fatal mistress hoists her silken sails,
And, shrinking from the fight, invokes the gales.
Aghast she looks, and heaves her breast for breath,
Panting, and pale with fear of future death.
The god had figur'd her as driv'n along
By winds and waves, and scudding thro' the throng.
Just opposite, sad Nilus opens wide
His arms and ample bosom to the tide,
And spreads his mantle o'er the winding coast,
In which he wraps his queen, and hides the flying host.
The victor to the gods his thanks express'd,
And Rome, triumphant, with his presence bless'd.
Three hundred temples in the town he plac'd;
With spoils and altars ev'ry temple grac'd.
Three shining nights, and three succeeding days,
The fields resound with shouts, the streets with praise,
The domes with songs, the theaters with plays.
All altars flame: before each altar lies,
Drench'd in his gore, the destin'd sacrifice.
Great Caesar sits sublime upon his throne,
Before Apollo's porch of Parian stone;
Accepts the presents vow'd for victory,
And hangs the monumental crowns on high.
Vast crowds of vanquish'd nations march along,
Various in arms, in habit, and in tongue.
Here, Mulciber assigns the proper place
For Carians, and th' ungirt Numidian race;
Then ranks the Thracians in the second row,
With Scythians, expert in the dart and bow.
And here the tam'd Euphrates humbly glides,
And there the Rhine submits her swelling tides,
And proud Araxes, whom no bridge could bind;
The Danes' unconquer'd offspring march behind,
And Morini, the last of humankind.

These figures, on the shield divinely wrought,
By Vulcan labor'd, and by Venus brought,
With joy and wonder fill the hero's thought.
Unknown the names, he yet admires the grace,
And bears aloft the fame and fortune of his race.





While these affairs in distant places pass'd,
The various Iris Juno sends with haste,
To find bold Turnus, who, with anxious thought,
The secret shade of his great grandsire sought.
Retir'd alone she found the daring man,
And op'd her rosy lips, and thus began:
"What none of all the gods could grant thy vows,
That, Turnus, this auspicious day bestows.
Aeneas, gone to seek th' Arcadian prince,
Has left the Trojan camp without defense;
And, short of succors there, employs his pains
In parts remote to raise the Tuscan swains.
Now snatch an hour that favors thy designs;
Unite thy forces, and attack their lines."
This said, on equal wings she pois'd her weight,
And form'd a radiant rainbow in her flight.

The Daunian hero lifts his hands eyes,
And thus invokes the goddess as she flies:
"Iris, the grace of heav'n, what pow'r divine
Has sent thee down, thro' dusky clouds to shine?
See, they divide; immortal day appears,
And glitt'ring planets dancing in their spheres!
With joy, these happy omens I obey,
And follow to the war the god that leads the way."
Thus having said, as by the brook he stood,
He scoop'd the water from the crystal flood;
Then with his hands the drops to heav'n he throws,
And loads the pow'rs above with offer'd vows.

Now march the bold confed'rates thro' the plain,
Well hors'd, well clad; a rich and shining train.
Messapus leads the van; and, in the rear,
The sons of Tyrrheus in bright arms appear.
In the main battle, with his flaming crest,
The mighty Turnus tow'rs above the rest.
Silent they move, majestically slow,
Like ebbing Nile, or Ganges in his flow.
The Trojans view the dusty cloud from far,
And the dark menace of the distant war.
Caicus from the rampire saw it rise,
Black'ning the fields, and thick'ning thro' the skies.
Then to his fellows thus aloud he calls:
"What rolling clouds, my friends, approach the walls?
Arm! arm! and man the works! prepare your spears
And pointed darts! the Latian host appears."

Thus warn'd, they shut their gates; with shouts ascend
The bulwarks, and, secure, their foes attend:
For their wise gen'ral, with foreseeing care,
Had charg'd them not to tempt the doubtful war,
Nor, tho' provok'd, in open fields advance,
But close within their lines attend their chance.
Unwilling, yet they keep the strict command,
And sourly wait in arms the hostile band.
The fiery Turnus flew before the rest:
A piebald steed of Thracian strain he press'd;
His helm of massy gold, and crimson was his crest.
With twenty horse to second his designs,
An unexpected foe, he fac'd the lines.
"Is there," he said, "in arms, who bravely dare
His leader's honor and his danger share?"
Then spurring on, his brandish'd dart he threw,
In sign of war: applauding shouts ensue.

Amaz'd to find a dastard race, that run
Behind the rampires and the battle shun,
He rides around the camp, with rolling eyes,
And stops at ev'ry post, and ev'ry passage tries.
So roams the nightly wolf about the fold:
Wet with descending show'rs, and stiff with cold,
He howls for hunger, and he grins for pain,
(His gnashing teeth are exercis'd in vain,)
And, impotent of anger, finds no way
In his distended paws to grasp the prey.
The mothers listen; but the bleating lambs
Securely swig the dug, beneath the dams.
Thus ranges eager Turnus o'er the plain.
Sharp with desire, and furious with disdain;
Surveys each passage with a piercing sight,
To force his foes in equal field to fight.
Thus while he gazes round, at length he spies,
Where, fenc'd with strong redoubts, their navy lies,
Close underneath the walls; the washing tide
Secures from all approach this weaker side.
He takes the wish'd occasion, fills his hand
With ready fires, and shakes a flaming brand.
Urg'd by his presence, ev'ry soul is warm'd,
And ev'ry hand with kindled firs is arm'd.
From the fir'd pines the scatt'ring sparkles fly;
Fat vapors, mix'd with flames, involve the sky.
What pow'r, O Muses, could avert the flame
Which threaten'd, in the fleet, the Trojan name?
Tell: for the fact, thro' length of time obscure,
Is hard to faith; yet shall the fame endure.

'T is said that, when the chief prepar'd his flight,
And fell'd his timber from Mount Ida's height,
The grandam goddess then approach'd her son,
And with a mother's majesty begun:
"Grant me," she said, "the sole request I bring,
Since conquer'd heav'n has own'd you for its king.
On Ida's brows, for ages past, there stood,
With firs and maples fill'd, a shady wood;
And on the summit rose a sacred grove,
Where I was worship'd with religious love.
Those woods, that holy grove, my long delight,
I gave the Trojan prince, to speed his flight.
Now, fill'd with fear, on their behalf I come;
Let neither winds o'erset, nor waves intomb
The floating forests of the sacred pine;
But let it be their safety to be mine."
Then thus replied her awful son, who rolls
The radiant stars, and heav'n and earth controls:
"How dare you, mother, endless date demand
For vessels molded by a mortal hand?
What then is fate? Shall bold Aeneas ride,
Of safety certain, on th' uncertain tide?
Yet, what I can, I grant; when, wafted o'er,
The chief is landed on the Latian shore,
Whatever ships escape the raging storms,
At my command shall change their fading forms
To nymphs divine, and plow the wat'ry way,
Like Dotis and the daughters of the sea."
To seal his sacred vow, by Styx he swore,
The lake of liquid pitch, the dreary shore,
And Phlegethon's innavigable flood,
And the black regions of his brother god.
He said; and shook the skies with his imperial nod.

And now at length the number'd hours were come,
Prefix'd by fate's irrevocable doom,
When the great Mother of the Gods was free
To save her ships, and finish Jove's decree.
First, from the quarter of the morn, there sprung
A light that sign'd the heav'ns, and shot along;
Then from a cloud, fring'd round with golden fires,
Were timbrels heard, and Berecynthian choirs;
And, last, a voice, with more than mortal sounds,
Both hosts, in arms oppos'd, with equal horror wounds:
"O Trojan race, your needless aid forbear,
And know, my ships are my peculiar care.
With greater ease the bold Rutulian may,
With hissing brands, attempt to burn the sea,
Than singe my sacred pines. But you, my charge,
Loos'd from your crooked anchors, launch at large,
Exalted each a nymph: forsake the sand,
And swim the seas, at Cybele's command."
No sooner had the goddess ceas'd to speak,
When, lo! th' obedient ships their haulsers break;
And, strange to tell, like dolphins, in the main
They plunge their prows, and dive, and spring again:
As many beauteous maids the billows sweep,
As rode before tall vessels on the deep.

The foes, surpris'd with wonder, stood aghast;
Messapus curb'd his fiery courser's haste;
Old Tiber roar'd, and, raising up his head,
Call'd back his waters to their oozy bed.
Turnus alone, undaunted, bore the shock,
And with these words his trembling troops bespoke:
"These monsters for the Trojans' fate are meant,
And are by Jove for black presages sent.
He takes the cowards' last relief away;
For fly they cannot, and, constrain'd to stay,
Must yield unfought, a base inglorious prey.
The liquid half of all the globe is lost;
Heav'n shuts the seas, and we secure the coast.
Theirs is no more than that small spot of ground
Which myriads of our martial men surround.
Their fates I fear not, or vain oracles.
'T was giv'n to Venus they should cross the seas,
And land secure upon the Latian plains:
Their promis'd hour is pass'd, and mine remains.
'T is in the fate of Turnus to destroy,
With sword and fire, the faithless race of Troy.
Shall such affronts as these alone inflame
The Grecian brothers, and the Grecian name?
My cause and theirs is one; a fatal strife,
And final ruin, for a ravish'd wife.
Was 't not enough, that, punish'd for the crime,
They fell; but will they fall a second time?
One would have thought they paid enough before,
To curse the costly sex, and durst offend no more.
Can they securely trust their feeble wall,
A slight partition, a thin interval,
Betwixt their fate and them; when Troy, tho' built
By hands divine, yet perish'd by their guilt?
Lend me, for once, my friends, your valiant hands,
To force from out their lines these dastard bands.
Less than a thousand ships will end this war,
Nor Vulcan needs his fated arms prepare.
Let all the Tuscans, all th' Arcadians, join!
Nor these, nor those, shall frustrate my design.
Let them not fear the treasons of the night,
The robb'd Palladium, the pretended flight:
Our onset shall be made in open light.
No wooden engine shall their town betray;
Fires they shall have around, but fires by day.
No Grecian babes before their camp appear,
Whom Hector's arms detain'd to the tenth tardy year.
Now, since the sun is rolling to the west,
Give we the silent night to needful rest:
Refresh your bodies, and your arms prepare;
The morn shall end the small remains of war."

The post of honor to Messapus falls,
To keep the nightly guard, to watch the walls,
To pitch the fires at distances around,
And close the Trojans in their scanty ground.
Twice seven Rutulian captains ready stand,
And twice seven hundred horse these chiefs command;
All clad in shining arms the works invest,
Each with a radiant helm and waving crest.
Stretch'd at their length, they press the grassy ground;
They laugh, they sing, (the jolly bowls go round,)
With lights and cheerful fires renew the day,
And pass the wakeful night in feasts and play.

The Trojans, from above, their foes beheld,
And with arm'd legions all the rampires fill'd.
Seiz'd with affright, their gates they first explore;
Join works to works with bridges, tow'r to tow'r:
Thus all things needful for defense abound.
Mnestheus and brave Seresthus walk the round,
Commission'd by their absent prince to share
The common danger, and divide the care.
The soldiers draw their lots, and, as they fall,
By turns relieve each other on the wall.

Nigh where the foes their utmost guards advance,
To watch the gate was warlike Nisus' chance.
His father Hyrtacus of noble blood;
His mother was a huntress of the wood,
And sent him to the wars. Well could he bear
His lance in fight, and dart the flying spear,
But better skill'd unerring shafts to send.
Beside him stood Euryalus, his friend:
Euryalus, than whom the Trojan host
No fairer face, or sweeter air, could boast-
Scarce had the down to shade his cheeks begun.
One was their care, and their delight was one:
One common hazard in the war they shar'd,
And now were both by choice upon the guard.

Then Nisus thus: "Or do the gods inspire
This warmth, or make we gods of our desire?
A gen'rous ardor boils within my breast,
Eager of action, enemy to rest:
This urges me to fight, and fires my mind
To leave a memorable name behind.
Thou see'st the foe secure; how faintly shine
Their scatter'd fires! the most, in sleep supine
Along the ground, an easy conquest lie:
The wakeful few the fuming flagon ply;
All hush'd around. Now hear what I revolve-
A thought unripe- and scarcely yet resolve.
Our absent prince both camp and council mourn;
By message both would hasten his return:
If they confer what I demand on thee,
(For fame is recompense enough for me,)
Methinks, beneath yon hill, I have espied
A way that safely will my passage guide."

Euryalus stood list'ning while he spoke,
With love of praise and noble envy struck;
Then to his ardent friend expos'd his mind:
"All this, alone, and leaving me behind!
Am I unworthy, Nisus, to be join'd?
Thinkist thou I can my share of glory yield,
Or send thee unassisted to the field?
Not so my father taught my childhood arms;
Born in a siege, and bred among alarms!
Nor is my youth unworthy of my friend,
Nor of the heav'n-born hero I attend.
The thing call'd life, with ease I can disclaim,
And think it over-sold to purchase fame."

Then Nisus thus: "Alas! thy tender years
Would minister new matter to my fears.
So may the gods, who view this friendly strife,
Restore me to thy lov'd embrace with life,
Condemn'd to pay my vows, (as sure I trust,)
This thy request is cruel and unjust.
But if some chance- as many chances are,
And doubtful hazards, in the deeds of war-
If one should reach my head, there let it fall,
And spare thy life; I would not perish all.
Thy bloomy youth deserves a longer date:
Live thou to mourn thy love's unhappy fate;
To bear my mangled body from the foe,
Or buy it back, and fun'ral rites bestow.
Or, if hard fortune shall those dues deny,
Thou canst at least an empty tomb supply.
O let not me the widow's tears renew!
Nor let a mother's curse my name pursue:
Thy pious parent, who, for love of thee,
Forsook the coasts of friendly Sicily,
Her age committing to the seas and wind,
When ev'ry weary matron stay'd behind."
To this, Euryalus: "You plead in vain,
And but protract the cause you cannot gain.
No more delays, but haste!" With that, he wakes
The nodding watch; each to his office takes.
The guard reliev'd, the gen'rous couple went
To find the council at the royal tent.

All creatures else forgot their daily care,
And sleep, the common gift of nature, share;
Except the Trojan peers, who wakeful sate
In nightly council for th' indanger'd state.
They vote a message to their absent chief,
Shew their distress, and beg a swift relief.
Amid the camp a silent seat they chose,
Remote from clamor, and secure from foes.
On their left arms their ample shields they bear,
The right reclin'd upon the bending spear.
Now Nisus and his friend approach the guard,
And beg admission, eager to be heard:
Th' affair important, not to be deferr'd.
Ascanius bids 'em be conducted in,
Ord'ring the more experienc'd to begin.
Then Nisus thus: "Ye fathers, lend your ears;
Nor judge our bold attempt beyond our years.
The foe, securely drench'd in sleep and wine,
Neglect their watch; the fires but thinly shine;
And where the smoke in cloudy vapors flies,
Cov'ring the plain, and curling to the skies,
Betwixt two paths, which at the gate divide,
Close by the sea, a passage we have spied,
Which will our way to great Aeneas guide.
Expect each hour to see him safe again,
Loaded with spoils of foes in battle slain.
Snatch we the lucky minute while we may;
Nor can we be mistaken in the way;
For, hunting in the vale, we both have seen
The rising turrets, and the stream between,
And know the winding course, with ev'ry ford."

He ceas'd; and old Alethes took the word:
"Our country gods, in whom our trust we place,
Will yet from ruin save the Trojan race,
While we behold such dauntless worth appear
In dawning youth, and souls so void of fear."
Then into tears of joy the father broke;
Each in his longing arms by turns he took;
Panted and paus'd; and thus again he spoke:
"Ye brave young men, what equal gifts can we,
In recompense of such desert, decree?
The greatest, sure, and best you can receive,
The gods and your own conscious worth will give.
The rest our grateful gen'ral will bestow,
And young Ascanius till his manhood owe."

"And I, whose welfare in my father lies,"
Ascanius adds, "by the great deities,
By my dear country, by my household gods,
By hoary Vesta's rites and dark abodes,
Adjure you both, (on you my fortune stands;
That and my faith I plight into your hands,)
Make me but happy in his safe return,
Whose wanted presence I can only mourn;
Your common gift shall two large goblets be
Of silver, wrought with curious imagery,
And high emboss'd, which, when old Priam reign'd,
My conqu'ring sire at sack'd Arisba gain'd;
And more, two tripods cast in antic mold,
With two great talents of the finest gold;
Beside a costly bowl, ingrav'd with art,
Which Dido gave, when first she gave her heart.
But, if in conquer'd Italy we reign,
When spoils by lot the victor shall obtain-
Thou saw'st the courser by proud Turnus press'd:
That, Nisus, and his arms, and nodding crest,
And shield, from chance exempt, shall be thy share:
Twelve lab'ring slaves, twelve handmaids young and fair
All clad in rich attire, and train'd with care;
And, last, a Latian field with fruitful plains,
And a large portion of the king's domains.
But thou, whose years are more to mine allied-
No fate my vow'd affection shall divide
From thee, heroic youth! Be wholly mine;
Take full possession; all my soul is thine.
One faith, one fame, one fate, shall both attend;
My life's companion, and my bosom friend:
My peace shall be committed to thy care,
And to thy conduct my concerns in war."

Then thus the young Euryalus replied:
"Whatever fortune, good or bad, betide,
The same shall be my age, as now my youth;
No time shall find me wanting to my truth.
This only from your goodness let me gain
(And, this ungranted, all rewards are vain)
Of Priam's royal race my mother came-
And sure the best that ever bore the name-
Whom neither Troy nor Sicily could hold
From me departing, but, o'erspent and old,
My fate she follow'd. Ignorant of this
(Whatever) danger, neither parting kiss,
Nor pious blessing taken, her I leave,
And in this only act of all my life deceive.
By this right hand and conscious Night I swear,
My soul so sad a farewell could not bear.
Be you her comfort; fill my vacant place
(Permit me to presume so great a grace)
Support her age, forsaken and distress'd.
That hope alone will fortify my breast
Against the worst of fortunes, and of fears."
He said. The mov'd assistants melt in tears.

Then thus Ascanius, wonderstruck to see
That image of his filial piety:
"So great beginnings, in so green an age,
Exact the faith which I again ingage.
Thy mother all the dues shall justly claim,
Creusa had, and only want the name.
Whate'er event thy bold attempt shall have,
'T is merit to have borne a son so brave.
Now by my head, a sacred oath, I swear,
(My father us'd it,) what, returning here
Crown'd with success, I for thyself prepare,
That, if thou fail, shall thy lov'd mother share."

He said, and weeping, while he spoke the word,
From his broad belt he drew a shining sword,
Magnificent with gold. Lycaon made,
And in an ivory scabbard sheath'd the blade.
This was his gift. Great Mnestheus gave his friend
A lion's hide, his body to defend;
And good Alethes furnish'd him, beside,
With his own trusty helm, of temper tried.

Thus arm'd they went. The noble Trojans wait
Their issuing forth, and follow to the gate
With prayers and vows. Above the rest appears
Ascanius, manly far beyond his years,
And messages committed to their care,
Which all in winds were lost, and flitting air.

The trenches first they pass'd; then took their way
Where their proud foes in pitch'd pavilions lay;
To many fatal, ere themselves were slain.
They found the careless host dispers'd upon the plain,
Who, gorg'd, and drunk with wine, supinely snore.
Unharness'd chariots stand along the shore:
Amidst the wheels and reins, the goblet by,
A medley of debauch and war, they lie.
Observing Nisus shew'd his friend the sight:
"Behold a conquest gain'd without a fight.
Occasion offers, and I stand prepar'd;
There lies our way; be thou upon the guard,
And look around, while I securely go,
And hew a passage thro' the sleeping foe."
Softly he spoke; then striding took his way,
With his drawn sword, where haughty Rhamnes lay;
His head rais'd high on tapestry beneath,
And heaving from his breast, he drew his breath;
A king and prophet, by King Turnus lov'd:
But fate by prescience cannot be remov'd.
Him and his sleeping slaves he slew; then spies
Where Remus, with his rich retinue, lies.
His armor-bearer first, and next he kills
His charioteer, intrench'd betwixt the wheels
And his lov'd horses; last invades their lord;
Full on his neck he drives the fatal sword:
The gasping head flies off; a purple flood
Flows from the trunk, that welters in the blood,
Which, by the spurning heels dispers'd around,
The bed besprinkles and bedews the ground.
Lamus the bold, and Lamyrus the strong,
He slew, and then Serranus fair and young.
From dice and wine the youth retir'd to rest,
And puff'd the fumy god from out his breast:
Ev'n then he dreamt of drink and lucky play-
More lucky, had it lasted till the day.
The famish'd lion thus, with hunger bold,
O'erleaps the fences of the nightly fold,
And tears the peaceful flocks: with silent awe
Trembling they lie, and pant beneath his paw.

Nor with less rage Euryalus employs
The wrathful sword, or fewer foes destroys;
But on th' ignoble crowd his fury flew;
He Fadus, Hebesus, and Rhoetus slew.
Oppress'd with heavy sleep the former fell,
But Rhoetus wakeful, and observing all:
Behind a spacious jar he slink'd for fear;
The fatal iron found and reach'd him there;
For, as he rose, it pierc'd his naked side,
And, reeking, thence return'd in crimson dyed.
The wound pours out a stream of wine and blood;
The purple soul comes floating in the flood.

Now, where Messapus quarter'd, they arrive.
The fires were fainting there, and just alive;
The warrior-horses, tied in order, fed.
Nisus observ'd the discipline, and said:
"Our eager thirst of blood may both betray;
And see the scatter'd streaks of dawning day,
Foe to nocturnal thefts. No more, my friend;
Here let our glutted execution end.
A lane thro' slaughter'd bodies we have made."
The bold Euryalus, tho' loth, obey'd.
Of arms, and arras, and of plate, they find
A precious load; but these they leave behind.
Yet, fond of gaudy spoils, the boy would stay
To make the rich caparison his prey,
Which on the steed of conquer'd Rhamnes lay.
Nor did his eyes less longingly behold
The girdle-belt, with nails of burnish'd gold.
This present Caedicus the rich bestow'd
On Remulus, when friendship first they vow'd,
And, absent, join'd in hospitable ties:
He, dying, to his heir bequeath'd the prize;
Till, by the conqu'ring Ardean troops oppress'd,
He fell; and they the glorious gift possess'd.
These glitt'ring spoils (now made the victor's gain)
He to his body suits, but suits in vain:
Messapus' helm he finds among the rest,
And laces on, and wears the waving crest.
Proud of their conquest, prouder of their prey,
They leave the camp, and take the ready way.

But far they had not pass'd, before they spied
Three hundred horse, with Volscens for their guide.
The queen a legion to King Turnus sent;
But the swift horse the slower foot prevent,
And now, advancing, sought the leader's tent.
They saw the pair; for, thro' the doubtful shade,
His shining helm Euryalus betray'd,
On which the moon with full reflection play'd.
"'T is not for naught," cried Volscens from the crowd,
"These men go there;" then rais'd his voice aloud:
"Stand! stand! why thus in arms? And whither bent?
From whence, to whom, and on what errand sent?"
Silent they scud away, and haste their flight
To neighb'ring woods, and trust themselves to night.
The speedy horse all passages belay,
And spur their smoking steeds to cross their way,
And watch each entrance of the winding wood.
Black was the forest: thick with beech it stood,
Horrid with fern, and intricate with thorn;
Few paths of human feet, or tracks of beasts, were worn.
The darkness of the shades, his heavy prey,
And fear, misled the younger from his way.
But Nisus hit the turns with happier haste,
And, thoughtless of his friend, the forest pass'd,
And Alban plains, from Alba's name so call'd,
Where King Latinus then his oxen stall'd;
Till, turning at the length, he stood his ground,
And miss'd his friend, and cast his eyes around:
"Ah wretch!" he cried, "where have I left behind
Th' unhappy youth? where shall I hope to find?
Or what way take?" Again he ventures back,
And treads the mazes of his former track.
He winds the wood, and, list'ning, hears the noise
Of tramping coursers, and the riders' voice.
The sound approach'd; and suddenly he view'd
The foes inclosing, and his friend pursued,
Forelaid and taken, while he strove in vain
The shelter of the friendly shades to gain.
What should he next attempt? what arms employ,
What fruitless force, to free the captive boy?
Or desperate should he rush and lose his life,
With odds oppress'd, in such unequal strife?

Resolv'd at length, his pointed spear he shook;
And, casting on the moon a mournful look:
"Guardian of groves, and goddess of the night,
Fair queen," he said, "direct my dart aright.
If e'er my pious father, for my sake,
Did grateful off'rings on thy altars make,
Or I increas'd them with my sylvan toils,
And hung thy holy roofs with savage spoils,
Give me to scatter these." Then from his ear
He pois'd, and aim'd, and launch'd the trembling spear.
The deadly weapon, hissing from the grove,
Impetuous on the back of Sulmo drove;
Pierc'd his thin armor, drank his vital blood,
And in his body left the broken wood.
He staggers round; his eyeballs roll in death,
And with short sobs he gasps away his breath.
All stand amaz'd- a second jav'lin flies
With equal strength, and quivers thro' the skies.
This thro' thy temples, Tagus, forc'd the way,
And in the brainpan warmly buried lay.
Fierce Volscens foams with rage, and, gazing round,
Descried not him who gave the fatal wound,
Nor knew to fix revenge: "But thou," he cries,
"Shalt pay for both," and at the pris'ner flies
With his drawn sword. Then, struck with deep despair,
That cruel sight the lover could not bear;
But from his covert rush'd in open view,
And sent his voice before him as he flew:
"Me! me!" he cried- "turn all your swords alone
On me- the fact confess'd, the fault my own.
He neither could nor durst, the guiltless youth:
Ye moon and stars, bear witness to the truth!
His only crime (if friendship can offend)
Is too much love to his unhappy friend."
Too late he speaks: the sword, which fury guides,
Driv'n with full force, had pierc'd his tender sides.
Down fell the beauteous youth: the yawning wound
Gush'd out a purple stream, and stain'd the ground.
His snowy neck reclines upon his breast,
Like a fair flow'r by the keen share oppress'd;
Like a white poppy sinking on the plain,
Whose heavy head is overcharg'd with rain.
Despair, and rage, and vengeance justly vow'd,
Drove Nisus headlong on the hostile crowd.
Volscens he seeks; on him alone he bends:
Borne back and bor'd by his surrounding friends,
Onward he press'd, and kept him still in sight;
Then whirl'd aloft his sword with all his might:
Th' unerring steel descended while he spoke,
Piered his wide mouth, and thro' his weazon broke.
Dying, he slew; and, stagg'ring on the plain,
With swimming eyes he sought his lover slain;
Then quiet on his bleeding bosom fell,
Content, in death, to be reveng'd so well.

O happy friends! for, if my verse can give
Immortal life, your fame shall ever live,
Fix'd as the Capitol's foundation lies,
And spread, where'er the Roman eagle flies!

The conqu'ring party first divide the prey,
Then their slain leader to the camp convey.
With wonder, as they went, the troops were fill'd,
To see such numbers whom so few had kill'd.
Serranus, Rhamnes, and the rest, they found:
Vast crowds the dying and the dead surround;
And the yet reeking blood o'erflows the ground.
All knew the helmet which Messapus lost,
But mourn'd a purchase that so dear had cost.
Now rose the ruddy morn from Tithon's bed,
And with the dawn of day the skies o'erspread;
Nor long the sun his daily course withheld,
But added colors to the world reveal'd:
When early Turnus, wak'ning with the light,
All clad in armor, calls his troops to fight.
His martial men with fierce harangue he fir'd,
And his own ardor in their souls inspir'd.
This done- to give new terror to his foes,
The heads of Nisus and his friend he shows,
Rais'd high on pointed spears- a ghastly sight:
Loud peals of shouts ensue, and barbarous delight.

Meantime the Trojans run, where danger calls;
They line their trenches, and they man their walls.
In front extended to the left they stood;
Safe was the right, surrounded by the flood.
But, casting from their tow'rs a frightful view,
They saw the faces, which too well they knew,
Tho' then disguis'd in death, and smear'd all o'er
With filth obscene, and dropping putrid gore.
Soon hasty fame thro' the sad city bears
The mournful message to the mother's ears.
An icy cold benumbs her limbs; she shakes;
Her cheeks the blood, her hand the web forsakes.
She runs the rampires round amidst the war,
Nor fears the flying darts; she rends her hair,
And fills with loud laments the liquid air.
"Thus, then, my lov'd Euryalus appears!
Thus looks the prop my declining years!
Was't on this face my famish'd eyes I fed?
Ah! how unlike the living is the dead!
And could'st thou leave me, cruel, thus alone?
Not one kind kiss from a departing son!
No look, no last adieu before he went,
In an ill-boding hour to slaughter sent!
Cold on the ground, and pressing foreign clay,
To Latian dogs and fowls he lies a prey!
Nor was I near to close his dying eyes,
To wash his wounds, to weep his obsequies,
To call about his corpse his crying friends,
Or spread the mantle (made for other ends)
On his dear body, which I wove with care,
Nor did my daily pains or nightly labor spare.
Where shall I find his corpse? what earth sustains
His trunk dismember'd, and his cold remains?
For this, alas! I left my needful ease,
Expos'd my life to winds and winter seas!
If any pity touch Rutulian hearts,
Here empty all your quivers, all your darts;
Or, if they fail, thou, Jove, conclude my woe,
And send me thunderstruck to shades below!"
Her shrieks and clamors pierce the Trojans' ears,
Unman their courage, and augment their fears;
Nor young Ascanius could the sight sustain,
Nor old Ilioneus his tears restrain,
But Actor and Idaeus jointly sent,
To bear the madding mother to her tent.

And now the trumpets terribly, from far,
With rattling clangor, rouse the sleepy war.
The soldiers' shouts succeed the brazen sounds;
And heav'n, from pole to pole, the noise rebounds.
The Volscians bear their shields upon their head,
And, rushing forward, form a moving shed.
These fill the ditch; those pull the bulwarks down:
Some raise the ladders; others scale the town.
But, where void spaces on the walls appear,
Or thin defense, they pour their forces there.
With poles and missive weapons, from afar,
The Trojans keep aloof the rising war.
Taught, by their ten years' siege, defensive fight,
They roll down ribs of rocks, an unresisted weight,
To break the penthouse with the pond'rous blow,
Which yet the patient Volscians undergo:
But could not bear th' unequal combat long;
For, where the Trojans find the thickest throng,
The ruin falls: their shatter'd shields give way,
And their crush'd heads become an easy prey.
They shrink for fear, abated of their rage,
Nor longer dare in a blind fight engage;
Contented now to gall them from below
With darts and slings, and with the distant bow.

Elsewhere Mezentius, terrible to view,
A blazing pine within the trenches threw.
But brave Messapus, Neptune's warlike son,
Broke down the palisades, the trenches won,
And loud for ladders calls, to scale the town.

Calliope, begin! Ye sacred Nine,
Inspire your poet in his high design,
To sing what slaughter manly Turnus made,
What souls he sent below the Stygian shade,
What fame the soldiers with their captain share,
And the vast circuit of the fatal war;
For you in singing martial facts excel;
You best remember, and alone can tell.

There stood a tow'r, amazing to the sight,
Built up of beams, and of stupendous height:
Art, and the nature of the place, conspir'd
To furnish all the strength that war requir'd.
To level this, the bold Italians join;
The wary Trojans obviate their design;
With weighty stones o'erwhelm their troops below,
Shoot thro' the loopholes, and sharp jav'lins throw.
Turnus, the chief, toss'd from his thund'ring hand
Against the wooden walls, a flaming brand:
It stuck, the fiery plague; the winds were high;
The planks were season'd, and the timber dry.
Contagion caught the posts; it spread along,
Scorch'd, and to distance drove the scatter'd throng.
The Trojans fled; the fire pursued amain,
Still gath'ring fast upon the trembling train;
Till, crowding to the corners of the wall,
Down the defense and the defenders fall.
The mighty flaw makes heav'n itself resound:
The dead and dying Trojans strew the ground.
The tow'r, that follow'd on the fallen crew,
Whelm'd o'er their heads, and buried whom it slew:
Some stuck upon the darts themselves had sent;
All the same equal ruin underwent.

Young Lycus and Helenor only scape;
Sav'd- how, they know not- from the steepy leap.
Helenor, elder of the two: by birth,
On one side royal, one a son of earth,
Whom to the Lydian king Licymnia bare,
And sent her boasted bastard to the war
(A privilege which none but freemen share).
Slight were his arms, a sword and silver shield:
No marks of honor charg'd its empty field.
Light as he fell, so light the youth arose,
And rising, found himself amidst his foes;
Nor flight was left, nor hopes to force his way.
Embolden'd by despair, he stood at bay;
And- like a stag, whom all the troop surrounds
Of eager huntsmen and invading hounds-
Resolv'd on death, he dissipates his fears,
And bounds aloft against the pointed spears:
So dares the youth, secure of death; and throws
His dying body on his thickest foes.
But Lycus, swifter of his feet by far,
Runs, doubles, winds and turns, amidst the war;
Springs to the walls, and leaves his foes behind,
And snatches at the beam he first can find;
Looks up, and leaps aloft at all the stretch,
In hopes the helping hand of some kind friend to reach.
But Turnus follow'd hard his hunted prey
(His spear had almost reach'd him in the way,
Short of his reins, and scarce a span behind)
"Fool!" said the chief, "tho' fleeter than the wind,
Couldst thou presume to scape, when I pursue?"
He said, and downward by the feet he drew
The trembling dastard; at the tug he falls;
Vast ruins come along, rent from the smoking walls.
Thus on some silver swan, or tim'rous hare,
Jove's bird comes sousing down from upper air;
Her crooked talons truss the fearful prey:
Then out of sight she soars, and wings her way.
So seizes the grim wolf the tender lamb,
In vain lamented by the bleating dam.

Then rushing onward with a barb'rous cry,
The troops of Turnus to the combat fly.
The ditch with fagots fill'd, the daring foe
Toss'd firebrands to the steepy turrets throw.

Ilioneus, as bold Lucetius came
To force the gate, and feed the kindling flame,
Roll'd down the fragment of a rock so right,
It crush'd him double underneath the weight.
Two more young Liger and Asylas slew:
To bend the bow young Liger better knew;
Asylas best the pointed jav'lin threw.
Brave Caeneus laid Ortygius on the plain;
The victor Caeneus was by Turnus slain.
By the same hand, Clonius and Itys fall,
Sagar, and Ida, standing on the wall.
From Capys' arms his fate Privernus found:
Hurt by Themilla first-but slight the wound-
His shield thrown by, to mitigate the smart,
He clapp'd his hand upon the wounded part:
The second shaft came swift and unespied,
And pierc'd his hand, and nail'd it to his side,
Transfix'd his breathing lungs and beating heart:
The soul came issuing out, and hiss'd against the dart.

The son of Arcens shone amid the rest,
In glitt'ring armor and a purple vest,
(Fair was his face, his eyes inspiring love,)
Bred by his father in the Martian grove,
Where the fat altars of Palicus flame,
And send in arms to purchase early fame.
Him when he spied from far, the Tuscan king
Laid by the lance, and took him to the sling,
Thrice whirl'd the thong around his head, and threw:
The heated lead half melted as it flew;
It pierc'd his hollow temples and his brain;
The youth came tumbling down, and spurn'd the plain.

Then young Ascanius, who, before this day,
Was wont in woods to shoot the savage prey,
First bent in martial strife the twanging bow,
And exercis'd against a human foe-
With this bereft Numanus of his life,
Who Turnus' younger sister took to wife.
Proud of his realm, and of his royal bride,
Vaunting before his troops, and lengthen'd with a stride,
In these insulting terms the Trojans he defied:

"Twice-conquer'd cowards, now your shame is shown-
Coop'd up a second time within your town!
Who dare not issue forth in open field,
But hold your walls before you for a shield.
Thus threat you war? thus our alliance force?
What gods, what madness, hether steer'd your course?
You shall not find the sons of Atreus here,
Nor need the frauds of sly Ulysses fear.
Strong from the cradle, of a sturdy brood,
We bear our newborn infants to the flood;
There bath'd amid the stream, our boys we hold,
With winter harden'd, and inur'd to cold.
They wake before the day to range the wood,
Kill ere they eat, nor taste unconquer'd food.
No sports, but what belong to war, they know:
To break the stubborn colt, to bend the bow.
Our youth, of labor patient, earn their bread;
Hardly they work, with frugal diet fed.
From plows and harrows sent to seek renown,
They fight in fields, and storm the shaken town.
No part of life from toils of war is free,
No change in age, or diff'rence in degree.
We plow and till in arms; our oxen feel,
Instead of goads, the spur and pointed steel;
Th' inverted lance makes furrows in the plain.
Ev'n time, that changes all, yet changes us in vain:
The body, not the mind; nor can control
Th' immortal vigor, or abate the soul.
Our helms defend the young, disguise the gray:
We live by plunder, and delight in prey.
Your vests embroider'd with rich purple shine;
In sloth you glory, and in dances join.
Your vests have sweeping sleeves; with female pride
Your turbants underneath your chins are tied.
Go, Phrygians, to your Dindymus again!
Go, less than women, in the shapes of men!
Go, mix'd with eunuchs, in the Mother's rites,
Where with unequal sound the flute invites;
Sing, dance, and howl, by turns, in Ida's shade:
Resign the war to men, who know the martial trade!"

This foul reproach Ascanius could not hear
With patience, or a vow'd revenge forbear.
At the full stretch of both his hands he drew,
And almost join'd the horns of the tough yew.
But, first, before the throne of Jove he stood,
And thus with lifted hands invok'd the god:
"My first attempt, great Jupiter, succeed!
An annual off'ring in thy grove shall bleed;
A snow-white steer, before thy altar led,
Who, like his mother, bears aloft his head,
Butts with his threat'ning brows, and bellowing stands,
And dares the fight, and spurns the yellow sands."

Jove bow'd the heav'ns, and lent a gracious ear,
And thunder'd on the left, amidst the clear.
Sounded at once the bow; and swiftly flies
The feather'd death, and hisses thro' the skies.
The steel thro' both his temples forc'd the way:
Extended on the ground, Numanus lay.
"Go now, vain boaster, and true valor scorn!
The Phrygians, twice subdued, yet make this third return."
Ascanius said no more. The Trojans shake
The heav'ns with shouting, and new vigor take.

Apollo then bestrode a golden cloud,
To view the feats of arms, and fighting crowd;
And thus the beardless victor he bespoke aloud:
"Advance, illustrious youth, increase in fame,
And wide from east to west extend thy name;
Offspring of gods thyself; and Rome shall owe
To thee a race of demigods below.
This is the way to heav'n: the pow'rs divine
From this beginning date the Julian line.
To thee, to them, and their victorious heirs,
The conquer'd war is due, and the vast world is theirs.
Troy is too narrow for thy name." He said,
And plunging downward shot his radiant head;
Dispell'd the breathing air, that broke his flight:
Shorn of his beams, a man to mortal sight.
Old Butes' form he took, Anchises' squire,
Now left, to rule Ascanius, by his sire:
His wrinkled visage, and his hoary hairs,
His mien, his habit, and his arms, he wears,
And thus salutes the boy, too forward for his years:
"Suffice it thee, thy father's worthy son,
The warlike prize thou hast already won.
The god of archers gives thy youth a part
Of his own praise, nor envies equal art.
Now tempt the war no more." He said, and flew
Obscure in air, and vanish'd from their view.
The Trojans, by his arms, their patron know,
And hear the twanging of his heav'nly bow.
Then duteous force they use, and Phoebus' name,
To keep from fight the youth too fond of fame.
Undaunted, they themselves no danger shun;
From wall to wall the shouts and clamors run.
They bend their bows; they whirl their slings around;
Heaps of spent arrows fall, and strew the ground;
And helms, and shields, and rattling arms resound.
The combat thickens, like the storm that flies
From westward, when the show'ry Kids arise;
Or patt'ring hail comes pouring on the main,
When Jupiter descends in harden'd rain,
Or bellowing clouds burst with a stormy sound,
And with an armed winter strew the ground.

Pand'rus and Bitias, thunderbolts of war,
Whom Hiera to bold Alcanor bare
On Ida's top, two youths of height and size
Like firs that on their mother mountain rise,
Presuming on their force, the gates unbar,
And of their own accord invite the war.
With fates averse, against their king's command,
Arm'd, on the right and on the left they stand,
And flank the passage: shining steel they wear,
And waving crests above their heads appear.
Thus two tall oaks, that Padus' banks adorn,
Lift up to heav'n their leafy heads unshorn,
And, overpress'd with nature's heavy load,
Dance to the whistling winds, and at each other nod.
In flows a tide of Latians, when they see
The gate set open, and the passage free;
Bold Quercens, with rash Tmarus, rushing on,
Equicolus, that in bright armor shone,
And Haemon first; but soon repuls'd they fly,
Or in the well-defended pass they die.
These with success are fir'd, and those with rage,
And each on equal terms at length ingage.
Drawn from their lines, and issuing on the plain,
The Trojans hand to hand the fight maintain.

Fierce Turnus in another quarter fought,
When suddenly th' unhop'd-for news was brought,
The foes had left the fastness of their place,
Prevail'd in fight, and had his men in chase.
He quits th' attack, and, to prevent their fate,
Runs where the giant brothers guard the gate.
The first he met, Antiphates the brave,
But base-begotten on a Theban slave,
Sarpedon's son, he slew: the deadly dart
Found passage thro' his breast, and pierc'd his heart.
Fix'd in the wound th' Italian cornel stood,
Warm'd in his lungs, and in his vital blood.
Aphidnus next, and Erymanthus dies,
And Meropes, and the gigantic size
Of Bitias, threat'ning with his ardent eyes.
Not by the feeble dart he fell oppress'd
(A dart were lost within that roomy breast),
But from a knotted lance, large, heavy, strong,
Which roar'd like thunder as it whirl'd along:
Not two bull hides th' impetuous force withhold,
Nor coat of double mail, with scales of gold.
Down sunk the monster bulk and press'd the ground;
His arms and clatt'ring shield on the vast body sound,
Not with less ruin than the Bajan mole,
Rais'd on the seas, the surges to control-
At once comes tumbling down the rocky wall;
Prone to the deep, the stones disjointed fall
Of the vast pile; the scatter'd ocean flies;
Black sands, discolor'd froth, and mingled mud arise:
The frighted billows roll, and seek the shores;
Then trembles Prochyta, then Ischia roars:
Typhoeus, thrown beneath, by Jove's command,
Astonish'd at the flaw that shakes the land,
Soon shifts his weary side, and, scarce awake,
With wonder feels the weight press lighter on his back.

The warrior god the Latian troops inspir'd,
New strung their sinews, and their courage fir'd,
But chills the Trojan hearts with cold affright:
Then black despair precipitates their flight.

When Pandarus beheld his brother kill'd,
The town with fear and wild confusion fill'd,
He turns the hinges of the heavy gate
With both his hands, and adds his shoulders to the weight
Some happier friends within the walls inclos'd;
The rest shut out, to certain death expos'd:
Fool as he was, and frantic in his care,
T' admit young Turnus, and include the war!
He thrust amid the crowd, securely bold,
Like a fierce tiger pent amid the fold.
Too late his blazing buckler they descry,
And sparkling fires that shot from either eye,
His mighty members, and his ample breast,
His rattling armor, and his crimson crest.

Far from that hated face the Trojans fly,
All but the fool who sought his destiny.
Mad Pandarus steps forth, with vengeance vow'd
For Bitias' death, and threatens thus aloud:
"These are not Ardea's walls, nor this the town
Amata proffers with Lavinia's crown:
'T is hostile earth you tread. Of hope bereft,
No means of safe return by flight are left."
To whom, with count'nance calm, and soul sedate,
Thus Turnus: "Then begin, and try thy fate:
My message to the ghost of Priam bear;
Tell him a new Achilles sent thee there."

A lance of tough ground ash the Trojan threw,
Rough in the rind, and knotted as it grew:
With his full force he whirl'd it first around;
But the soft yielding air receiv'd the wound:
Imperial Juno turn'd the course before,
And fix'd the wand'ring weapon in the door.

"But hope not thou," said Turnus, "when I strike,
To shun thy fate: our force is not alike,
Nor thy steel temper'd by the Lemnian god."
Then rising, on his utmost stretch he stood,
And aim'd from high: the full descending blow
Cleaves the broad front and beardless cheeks in two.
Down sinks the giant with a thund'ring sound:
His pond'rous limbs oppress the trembling ground;
Blood, brains, and foam gush from the gaping wound:
Scalp, face, and shoulders the keen steel divides,
And the shar'd visage hangs on equal sides.
The Trojans fly from their approaching fate;
And, had the victor then secur'd the gate,
And to his troops without unclos'd the bars,
One lucky day had ended all his wars.
But boiling youth, and blind desire of blood,
Push'd on his fury, to pursue the crowd.
Hamstring'd behind, unhappy Gyges died;
Then Phalaris is added to his side.
The pointed jav'lins from the dead he drew,
And their friends' arms against their fellows threw.
Strong Halys stands in vain; weak Phlegys flies;
Saturnia, still at hand, new force and fire supplies.
Then Halius, Prytanis, Alcander fall-
Ingag'd against the foes who scal'd the wall:
But, whom they fear'd without, they found within.
At last, tho' late, by Lynceus he was seen.
He calls new succors, and assaults the prince:
But weak his force, and vain is their defense.
Turn'd to the right, his sword the hero drew,
And at one blow the bold aggressor slew.
He joints the neck; and, with a stroke so strong,
The helm flies off, and bears the head along.
Next him, the huntsman Amycus he kill'd,
In darts invenom'd and in poison skill'd.
Then Clytius fell beneath his fatal spear,
And Creteus, whom the Muses held so dear:
He fought with courage, and he sung the fight;
Arms were his bus'ness, verses his delight.

The Trojan chiefs behold, with rage and grief,
Their slaughter'd friends, and hasten their relief.
Bold Mnestheus rallies first the broken train,
Whom brave Seresthus and his troop sustain.
To save the living, and revenge the dead,
Against one warrior's arms all Troy they led.
"O, void of sense and courage!" Mnestheus cried,
"Where can you hope your coward heads to hide?
Ah! where beyond these rampires can you run?
One man, and in your camp inclos'd, you shun!
Shall then a single sword such slaughter boast,
And pass unpunish'd from a num'rous host?
Forsaking honor, and renouncing fame,
Your gods, your country, and your king you shame!"
This just reproach their virtue does excite:
They stand, they join, they thicken to the fight.

Now Turnus doubts, and yet disdains to yield,
But with slow paces measures back the field,
And inches to the walls, where Tiber's tide,
Washing the camp, defends the weaker side.
The more he loses, they advance the more,
And tread in ev'ry step he trod before.
They shout: they bear him back; and, whom by might
They cannot conquer, they oppress with weight.

As, compass'd with a wood of spears around,
The lordly lion still maintains his ground;
Grins horrible, retires, and turns again;
Threats his distended paws, and shakes his mane;
He loses while in vain he presses on,
Nor will his courage let him dare to run:
So Turnus fares, and, unresolved of flight,
Moves tardy back, and just recedes from fight.
Yet twice, inrag'd, the combat he renews,
Twice breaks, and twice his broken foes pursues.
But now they swarm, and, with fresh troops supplied,
Come rolling on, and rush from ev'ry side:
Nor Juno, who sustain'd his arms before,
Dares with new strength suffice th' exhausted store;
For Jove, with sour commands, sent Iris down,
To force th' invader from the frighted town.

With labor spent, no longer can he wield
The heavy fanchion, or sustain the shield,
O'erwhelm'd with darts, which from afar they fling:
The weapons round his hollow temples ring;
His golden helm gives way, with stony blows
Batter'd, and flat, and beaten to his brows.
His crest is rash'd away; his ample shield
Is falsified, and round with jav'lins fill'd.

The foe, now faint, the Trojans overwhelm;
And Mnestheus lays hard load upon his helm.
Sick sweat succeeds; he drops at ev'ry pore;
With driving dust his cheeks are pasted o'er;
Shorter and shorter ev'ry gasp he takes;
And vain efforts and hurtless blows he makes.
Plung'd in the flood, and made the waters fly.
The yellow god the welcome burthen bore,
And wip'd the sweat, and wash'd away the gore;
Then gently wafts him to the farther coast,
And sends him safe to cheer his anxious host.





The gates of heav'n unfold: Jove summons all
The gods to council in the common hall.
Sublimely seated, he surveys from far
The fields, the camp, the fortune of the war,
And all th' inferior world. From first to last,
The sov'reign senate in degrees are plac'd.

Then thus th' almighty sire began: "Ye gods,
Natives or denizens of blest abodes,
From whence these murmurs, and this change of mind,
This backward fate from what was first design'd?
Why this protracted war, when my commands
Pronounc'd a peace, and gave the Latian lands?
What fear or hope on either part divides
Our heav'ns, and arms our powers on diff'rent sides?
A lawful time of war at length will come,
(Nor need your haste anticipate the doom),
When Carthage shall contend the world with Rome,
Shall force the rigid rocks and Alpine chains,
And, like a flood, come pouring on the plains.
Then is your time for faction and debate,
For partial favor, and permitted hate.
Let now your immature dissension cease;
Sit quiet, and compose your souls to peace."

Thus Jupiter in few unfolds the charge;
But lovely Venus thus replies at large:
"O pow'r immense, eternal energy,
(For to what else protection can we fly?)
Seest thou the proud Rutulians, how they dare
In fields, unpunish'd, and insult my care?
How lofty Turnus vaunts amidst his train,
In shining arms, triumphant on the plain?
Ev'n in their lines and trenches they contend,
And scarce their walls the Trojan troops defend:
The town is fill'd with slaughter, and o'erfloats,
With a red deluge, their increasing moats.
Aeneas, ignorant, and far from thence,
Has left a camp expos'd, without defense.
This endless outrage shall they still sustain?
Shall Troy renew'd be forc'd and fir'd again?
A second siege my banish'd issue fears,
And a new Diomede in arms appears.
One more audacious mortal will be found;
And I, thy daughter, wait another wound.
Yet, if with fates averse, without thy leave,
The Latian lands my progeny receive,
Bear they the pains of violated law,
And thy protection from their aid withdraw.
But, if the gods their sure success foretell;
If those of heav'n consent with those of hell,
To promise Italy; who dare debate
The pow'r of Jove, or fix another fate?
What should I tell of tempests on the main,
Of Aeolus usurping Neptune's reign?
Of Iris sent, with Bacchanalian heat
T' inspire the matrons, and destroy the fleet?
Now Juno to the Stygian sky descends,
Solicits hell for aid, and arms the fiends.
That new example wanted yet above:
An act that well became the wife of Jove!
Alecto, rais'd by her, with rage inflames
The peaceful bosoms of the Latian dames.
Imperial sway no more exalts my mind;
(Such hopes I had indeed, while Heav'n was kind;)
Now let my happier foes possess my place,
Whom Jove prefers before the Trojan race;
And conquer they, whom you with conquest grace.
Since you can spare, from all your wide command,
No spot of earth, no hospitable land,
Which may my wand'ring fugitives receive;
(Since haughty Juno will not give you leave;)
Then, father, (if I still may use that name,)
By ruin'd Troy, yet smoking from the flame,
I beg you, let Ascanius, by my care,
Be freed from danger, and dismiss'd the war:
Inglorious let him live, without a crown.
The father may be cast on coasts unknown,
Struggling with fate; but let me save the son.
Mine is Cythera, mine the Cyprian tow'rs:
In those recesses, and those sacred bow'rs,
Obscurely let him rest; his right resign
To promis'd empire, and his Julian line.
Then Carthage may th' Ausonian towns destroy,
Nor fear the race of a rejected boy.
What profits it my son to scape the fire,
Arm'd with his gods, and loaded with his sire;
To pass the perils of the seas and wind;
Evade the Greeks, and leave the war behind;
To reach th' Italian shores; if, after all,
Our second Pergamus is doom'd to fall?
Much better had he curb'd his high desires,
And hover'd o'er his ill-extinguish'd fires.
To Simois' banks the fugitives restore,
And give them back to war, and all the woes before."

Deep indignation swell'd Saturnia's heart:
"And must I own," she said, "my secret smart-
What with more decence were in silence kept,
And, but for this unjust reproach, had slept?
Did god or man your fav'rite son advise,
With war unhop'd the Latians to surprise?
By fate, you boast, and by the gods' decree,
He left his native land for Italy!
Confess the truth; by mad Cassandra, more
Than Heav'n inspir'd, he sought a foreign shore!
Did I persuade to trust his second Troy
To the raw conduct of a beardless boy,
With walls unfinish'd, which himself forsakes,
And thro' the waves a wand'ring voyage takes?
When have I urg'd him meanly to demand
The Tuscan aid, and arm a quiet land?
Did I or Iris give this mad advice,
Or made the fool himself the fatal choice?
You think it hard, the Latians should destroy
With swords your Trojans, and with fires your Troy!
Hard and unjust indeed, for men to draw
Their native air, nor take a foreign law!
That Turnus is permitted still to live,
To whom his birth a god and goddess give!
But yet is just and lawful for your line
To drive their fields, and force with fraud to join;
Realms, not your own, among your clans divide,
And from the bridegroom tear the promis'd bride;
Petition, while you public arms prepare;
Pretend a peace, and yet provoke a war!
'T was giv'n to you, your darling son to shroud,
To draw the dastard from the fighting crowd,
And, for a man, obtend an empty cloud.
From flaming fleets you turn'd the fire away,
And chang'd the ships to daughters of the sea.
But is my crime- the Queen of Heav'n offends,
If she presume to save her suff'ring friends!
Your son, not knowing what his foes decree,
You say, is absent: absent let him be.
Yours is Cythera, yours the Cyprian tow'rs,
The soft recesses, and the sacred bow'rs.
Why do you then these needless arms prepare,
And thus provoke a people prone to war?
Did I with fire the Trojan town deface,
Or hinder from return your exil'd race?
Was I the cause of mischief, or the man
Whose lawless lust the fatal war began?
Think on whose faith th' adult'rous youth relied;
Who promis'd, who procur'd, the Spartan bride?
When all th' united states of Greece combin'd,
To purge the world of the perfidious kind,
Then was your time to fear the Trojan fate:
Your quarrels and complaints are now too late."

Thus Juno. Murmurs rise, with mix'd applause,
Just as they favor or dislike the cause.
So winds, when yet unfledg'd in woods they lie,
In whispers first their tender voices try,
Then issue on the main with bellowing rage,
And storms to trembling mariners presage.

Then thus to both replied th' imperial god,
Who shakes heav'n's axles with his awful nod.
(When he begins, the silent senate stand
With rev'rence, list'ning to the dread command:
The clouds dispel; the winds their breath restrain;
And the hush'd waves lie flatted on the main.)
"Celestials, your attentive ears incline!
Since," said the god, "the Trojans must not join
In wish'd alliance with the Latian line;
Since endless jarrings and immortal hate
Tend but to discompose our happy state;
The war henceforward be resign'd to fate:
Each to his proper fortune stand or fall;
Equal and unconcern'd I look on all.
Rutulians, Trojans, are the same to me;
And both shall draw the lots their fates decree.
Let these assault, if Fortune be their friend;
And, if she favors those, let those defend:
The Fates will find their way." The Thund'rer said,
And shook the sacred honors of his head,
Attesting Styx, th' inviolable flood,
And the black regions of his brother god.
Trembled the poles of heav'n, and earth confess'd the nod.
This end the sessions had: the senate rise,
And to his palace wait their sov'reign thro' the skies.

Meantime, intent upon their siege, the foes
Within their walls the Trojan host inclose:
They wound, they kill, they watch at ev'ry gate;
Renew the fires, and urge their happy fate.

Th' Aeneans wish in vain their wanted chief,
Hopeless of flight, more hopeless of relief.
Thin on the tow'rs they stand; and ev'n those few
A feeble, fainting, and dejected crew.
Yet in the face of danger some there stood:
The two bold brothers of Sarpedon's blood,
Asius and Acmon; both th' Assaraci;
Young Haemon, and tho' young, resolv'd to die.
With these were Clarus and Thymoetes join'd;
Tibris and Castor, both of Lycian kind.
From Acmon's hands a rolling stone there came,
So large, it half deserv'd a mountain's name:
Strong-sinew'd was the youth, and big of bone;
His brother Mnestheus could not more have done,
Or the great father of th' intrepid son.
Some firebrands throw, some flights of arrows send;
And some with darts, and some with stones defend.

Amid the press appears the beauteous boy,
The care of Venus, and the hope of Troy.
His lovely face unarm'd, his head was bare;
In ringlets o'er his shoulders hung his hair.
His forehead circled with a diadem;
Distinguish'd from the crowd, he shines a gem,
Enchas'd in gold, or polish'd iv'ry set,
Amidst the meaner foil of sable jet.

Nor Ismarus was wanting to the war,
Directing pointed arrows from afar,
And death with poison arm'd- in Lydia born,
Where plenteous harvests the fat fields adorn;
Where proud Pactolus floats the fruitful lands,
And leaves a rich manure of golden sands.
There Capys, author of the Capuan name,
And there was Mnestheus too, increas'd in fame,
Since Turnus from the camp he cast with shame.

Thus mortal war was wag'd on either side.
Meantime the hero cuts the nightly tide:
For, anxious, from Evander when he went,
He sought the Tyrrhene camp, and Tarchon's tent;
Expos'd the cause of coming to the chief;
His name and country told, and ask'd relief;
Propos'd the terms; his own small strength declar'd;
What vengeance proud Mezentius had prepar'd:
What Turnus, bold and violent, design'd;
Then shew'd the slipp'ry state of humankind,
And fickle fortune; warn'd him to beware,
And to his wholesome counsel added pray'r.
Tarchon, without delay, the treaty signs,
And to the Trojan troops the Tuscan joins.

They soon set sail; nor now the fates withstand;
Their forces trusted with a foreign hand.
Aeneas leads; upon his stern appear
Two lions carv'd, which rising Ida bear-
Ida, to wand'ring Trojans ever dear.
Under their grateful shade Aeneas sate,
Revolving war's events, and various fate.
His left young Pallas kept, fix'd to his side,
And oft of winds enquir'd, and of the tide;
Oft of the stars, and of their wat'ry way;
And what he suffer'd both by land and sea.

Now, sacred sisters, open all your spring!
The Tuscan leaders, and their army sing,
Which follow'd great Aeneas to the war:
Their arms, their numbers, and their names declare.

A thousand youths brave Massicus obey,
Borne in the Tiger thro' the foaming sea;
From Asium brought, and Cosa, by his care:
For arms, light quivers, bows and shafts, they bear.
Fierce Abas next: his men bright armor wore;
His stern Apollo's golden statue bore.
Six hundred Populonia sent along,
All skill'd in martial exercise, and strong.
Three hundred more for battle Ilva joins,
An isle renown'd for steel, and unexhausted mines.
Asylas on his prow the third appears,
Who heav'n interprets, and the wand'ring stars;
From offer'd entrails prodigies expounds,
And peals of thunder, with presaging sounds.
A thousand spears in warlike order stand,
Sent by the Pisans under his command.

Fair Astur follows in the wat'ry field,
Proud of his manag'd horse and painted shield.
Gravisca, noisome from the neighb'ring fen,
And his own Caere, sent three hundred men;
With those which Minio's fields and Pyrgi gave,
All bred in arms, unanimous, and brave.

Thou, Muse, the name of Cinyras renew,
And brave Cupavo follow'd but by few;
Whose helm confess'd the lineage of the man,
And bore, with wings display'd, a silver swan.
Love was the fault of his fam'd ancestry,
Whose forms and fortunes in his ensigns fly.
For Cycnus lov'd unhappy Phaeton,
And sung his loss in poplar groves, alone,
Beneath the sister shades, to soothe his grief.
Heav'n heard his song, and hasten'd his relief,
And chang'd to snowy plumes his hoary hair,
And wing'd his flight, to chant aloft in air.
His son Cupavo brush'd the briny flood:
Upon his stern a brawny Centaur stood,
Who heav'd a rock, and, threat'ning still to throw,
With lifted hands alarm'd the seas below:
They seem'd to fear the formidable sight,
And roll'd their billows on, to speed his flight.

Ocnus was next, who led his native train
Of hardy warriors thro' the wat'ry plain:
The son of Manto by the Tuscan stream,
From whence the Mantuan town derives the name-
An ancient city, but of mix'd descent:
Three sev'ral tribes compose the government;
Four towns are under each; but all obey
The Mantuan laws, and own the Tuscan sway.

Hate to Mezentius arm'd five hundred more,
Whom Mincius from his sire Benacus bore:
Mincius, with wreaths of reeds his forehead cover'd o'er.
These grave Auletes leads: a hundred sweep
With stretching oars at once the glassy deep.
Him and his martial train the Triton bears;
High on his poop the sea-green god appears:
Frowning he seems his crooked shell to sound,
And at the blast the billows dance around.
A hairy man above the waist he shows;
A porpoise tail beneath his belly grows;
And ends a fish: his breast the waves divides,
And froth and foam augment the murm'ring tides.

Full thirty ships transport the chosen train
For Troy's relief, and scour the briny main.

Now was the world forsaken by the sun,
And Phoebe half her nightly race had run.
The careful chief, who never clos'd his eyes,
Himself the rudder holds, the sails supplies.
A choir of Nereids meet him on the flood,
Once his own galleys, hewn from Ida's wood;
But now, as many nymphs, the sea they sweep,
As rode, before, tall vessels on the deep.
They know him from afar; and in a ring
Inclose the ship that bore the Trojan king.
Cymodoce, whose voice excell'd the rest,
Above the waves advanc'd her snowy breast;
Her right hand stops the stern; her left divides
The curling ocean, and corrects the tides.
She spoke for all the choir, and thus began
With pleasing words to warn th' unknowing man:
"Sleeps our lov'd lord? O goddess-born, awake!
Spread ev'ry sail, pursue your wat'ry track,
And haste your course. Your navy once were we,
From Ida's height descending to the sea;
Till Turnus, as at anchor fix'd we stood,
Presum'd to violate our holy wood.
Then, loos'd from shore, we fled his fires profane
(Unwillingly we broke our master's chain),
And since have sought you thro' the Tuscan main.
The mighty Mother chang'd our forms to these,
And gave us life immortal in the seas.
But young Ascanius, in his camp distress'd,
By your insulting foes is hardly press'd.
Th' Arcadian horsemen, and Etrurian host,
Advance in order on the Latian coast:
To cut their way the Daunian chief designs,
Before their troops can reach the Trojan lines.
Thou, when the rosy morn restores the light,
First arm thy soldiers for th' ensuing fight:
Thyself the fated sword of Vulcan wield,
And bear aloft th' impenetrable shield.
To-morrow's sun, unless my skill be vain,
Shall see huge heaps of foes in battle slain."
Parting, she spoke; and with immortal force
Push'd on the vessel in her wat'ry course;
For well she knew the way. Impell'd behind,
The ship flew forward, and outstripp'd the wind.
The rest make up. Unknowing of the cause,
The chief admires their speed, and happy omens draws.

Then thus he pray'd, and fix'd on heav'n his eyes:
"Hear thou, great Mother of the deities.
With turrets crown'd! (on Ida's holy hill
Fierce tigers, rein'd and curb'd, obey thy will.)
Firm thy own omens; lead us on to fight;
And let thy Phrygians conquer in thy right."

He said no more. And now renewing day
Had chas'd the shadows of the night away.
He charg'd the soldiers, with preventing care,
Their flags to follow, and their arms prepare;
Warn'd of th' ensuing fight, and bade 'em hope the war.
Now, his lofty poop, he view'd below
His camp incompass'd, and th' inclosing foe.
His blazing shield, imbrac'd, he held on high;
The camp receive the sign, and with loud shouts reply.
Hope arms their courage: from their tow'rs they throw
Their darts with double force, and drive the foe.
Thus, at the signal giv'n, the cranes arise
Before the stormy south, and blacken all the skies.

King Turnus wonder'd at the fight renew'd,
Till, looking back, the Trojan fleet he view'd,
The seas with swelling canvas cover'd o'er,
And the swift ships descending on the shore.
The Latians saw from far, with dazzled eyes,
The radiant crest that seem'd in flames to rise,
And dart diffusive fires around the field,
And the keen glitt'ring of the golden shield.
Thus threat'ning comets, when by night they rise,
Shoot sanguine streams, and sadden all the skies:
So Sirius, flashing forth sinister lights,
Pale humankind with plagues and with dry famine fright:

Yet Turnus with undaunted mind is bent
To man the shores, and hinder their descent,
And thus awakes the courage of his friends:
"What you so long have wish'd, kind Fortune sends;
In ardent arms to meet th' invading foe:
You find, and find him at advantage now.
Yours is the day: you need but only dare;
Your swords will make you masters of the war.
Your sires, your sons, your houses, and your lands,
And dearest wifes, are all within your hands.
Be mindful of the race from whence you came,
And emulate in arms your fathers' fame.
Now take the time, while stagg'ring yet they stand
With feet unfirm, and prepossess the strand:
Fortune befriends the bold." Nor more he said,
But balanc'd whom to leave, and whom to lead;
Then these elects, the landing to prevent;
And those he leaves, to keep the city pent.

Meantime the Trojan sends his troops ashore:
Some are by boats expos'd, by bridges more.
With lab'ring oars they bear along the strand,
Where the tide languishes, and leap aland.
Tarchon observes the coast with careful eyes,
And, where no ford he finds, no water fries,
Nor billows with unequal murmurs roar,
But smoothly slide along, and swell the shore,
That course he steer'd, and thus he gave command:
"Here ply your oars, and at all hazard land:
Force on the vessel, that her keel may wound
This hated soil, and furrow hostile ground.
Let me securely land- I ask no more;
Then sink my ships, or shatter on the shore."

This fiery speech inflames his fearful friends:
They tug at ev'ry oar, and ev'ry stretcher bends;
They run their ships aground; the vessels knock,
(Thus forc'd ashore,) and tremble with the shock.
Tarchon's alone was lost, that stranded stood,
Stuck on a bank, and beaten by the flood:
She breaks her back; the loosen'd sides give way,
And plunge the Tuscan soldiers in the sea.
Their broken oars and floating planks withstand
Their passage, while they labor to the land,
And ebbing tides bear back upon th' uncertain sand.

Now Turnus leads his troops without delay,
Advancing to the margin of the sea.
The trumpets sound: Aeneas first assail'd
The clowns new-rais'd and raw, and soon prevail'd.
Great Theron fell, an omen of the fight;
Great Theron, large of limbs, of giant height.
He first in open field defied the prince:
But armor scal'd with gold was no defense
Against the fated sword, which open'd wide
His plated shield, and pierc'd his naked side.
Next, Lichas fell, who, not like others born,
Was from his wretched mother ripp'd and torn;
Sacred, O Phoebus, from his birth to thee;
For his beginning life from biting steel was free.
Not far from him was Gyas laid along,
Of monstrous bulk; with Cisseus fierce and strong:
Vain bulk and strength! for, when the chief assail'd,
Nor valor nor Herculean arms avail'd,
Nor their fam'd father, wont in war to go
With great Alcides, while he toil'd below.
The noisy Pharos next receiv'd his death:
Aeneas writh'd his dart, and stopp'd his bawling breath.
Then wretched Cydon had receiv'd his doom,
Who courted Clytius in his beardless bloom,
And sought with lust obscene polluted joys:
The Trojan sword had curd his love of boys,
Had not his sev'n bold brethren stopp'd the course
Of the fierce champions, with united force.
Sev'n darts were thrown at once; and some rebound
From his bright shield, some on his helmet sound:
The rest had reach'd him; but his mother's care
Prevented those, and turn'd aside in air.

The prince then call'd Achates, to supply
The spears that knew the way to victory-
"Those fatal weapons, which, inur'd to blood,
In Grecian bodies under Ilium stood:
Not one of those my hand shall toss in vain
Against our foes, on this contended plain."
He said; then seiz'd a mighty spear, and threw;
Which, wing'd with fate, thro' Maeon's buckler flew,
Pierc'd all the brazen plates, and reach'd his heart:
He stagger'd with intolerable smart.
Alcanor saw; and reach'd, but reach'd in vain,
His helping hand, his brother to sustain.
A second spear, which kept the former course,
From the same hand, and sent with equal force,
His right arm pierc'd, and holding on, bereft
His use of both, and pinion'd down his left.
Then Numitor from his dead brother drew
Th' ill-omen'd spear, and at the Trojan threw:
Preventing fate directs the lance awry,
Which, glancing, only mark'd Achates' thigh.

In pride of youth the Sabine Clausus came,
And, from afar, at Dryops took his aim.
The spear flew hissing thro' the middle space,
And pierc'd his throat, directed at his face;
It stopp'd at once the passage of his wind,
And the free soul to flitting air resign'd:
His forehead was the first that struck the ground;
Lifeblood and life rush'd mingled thro' the wound.
He slew three brothers of the Borean race,
And three, whom Ismarus, their native place,
Had sent to war, but all the sons of Thrace.
Halesus, next, the bold Aurunci leads:
The son of Neptune to his aid succeeds,
Conspicuous on his horse. On either hand,
These fight to keep, and those to win, the land.
With mutual blood th' Ausonian soil is dyed,
While on its borders each their claim decide.
As wintry winds, contending in the sky,
With equal force of lungs their titles try:
They rage, they roar; the doubtful rack of heav'n
Stands without motion, and the tide undriv'n:
Each bent to conquer, neither side to yield,
They long suspend the fortune of the field.
Both armies thus perform what courage can;
Foot set to foot, and mingled man to man.

But, in another part, th' Arcadian horse
With ill success ingage the Latin force:
For, where th' impetuous torrent, rushing down,
Huge craggy stones and rooted trees had thrown,
They left their coursers, and, unus'd to fight
On foot, were scatter'd in a shameful flight.
Pallas, who with disdain and grief had view'd
His foes pursuing, and his friends pursued,
Us'd threat'nings mix'd with pray'rs, his last resource,
With these to move their minds, with those to fire their force
"Which way, companions? whether would you run?
By you yourselves, and mighty battles won,
By my great sire, by his establish'd name,
And early promise of my future fame;
By my youth, emulous of equal right
To share his honors- shun ignoble flight!
Trust not your feet: your hands must hew way
Thro' yon black body, and that thick array:
'T is thro' that forward path that we must come;
There lies our way, and that our passage home.
Nor pow'rs above, nor destinies below
Oppress our arms: with equal strength we go,
With mortal hands to meet a mortal foe.
See on what foot we stand: a scanty shore,
The sea behind, our enemies before;
No passage left, unless we swim the main;
Or, forcing these, the Trojan trenches gain."
This said, he strode with eager haste along,
And bore amidst the thickest of the throng.
Lagus, the first he met, with fate to foe,
Had heav'd a stone of mighty weight, to throw:
Stooping, the spear descended on his chine,
Just where the bone distinguished either loin:
It stuck so fast, so deeply buried lay,
That scarce the victor forc'd the steel away.
Hisbon came on: but, while he mov'd too slow
To wish'd revenge, the prince prevents his blow;
For, warding his at once, at once he press'd,
And plung'd the fatal weapon in his breast.
Then lewd Anchemolus he laid in dust,
Who stain'd his stepdam's bed with impious lust.
And, after him, the Daucian twins were slain,
Laris and Thymbrus, on the Latian plain;
So wondrous like in feature, shape, and size,
As caus'd an error in their parents' eyes-
Grateful mistake! but soon the sword decides
The nice distinction, and their fate divides:
For Thymbrus' head was lopp'd; and Laris' hand,
Dismember'd, sought its owner on the strand:
The trembling fingers yet the fauchion strain,
And threaten still th' intended stroke in vain.

Now, to renew the charge, th' Arcadians came:
Sight of such acts, and sense of honest shame,
And grief, with anger mix'd, their minds inflame.
Then, with a casual blow was Rhoeteus slain,
Who chanc'd, as Pallas threw, to cross the plain:
The flying spear was after Ilus sent;
But Rhoeteus happen'd on a death unmeant:
From Teuthras and from Tyres while he fled,
The lance, athwart his body, laid him dead:
Roll'd from his chariot with a mortal wound,
And intercepted fate, he spurn'd the ground.
As when, in summer, welcome winds arise,
The watchful shepherd to the forest flies,
And fires the midmost plants; contagion spreads,
And catching flames infect the neighb'ring heads;
Around the forest flies the furious blast,
And all the leafy nation sinks at last,
And Vulcan rides in triumph o'er the waste;
The pastor, pleas'd with his dire victory,
Beholds the satiate flames in sheets ascend the sky:
So Pallas' troops their scatter'd strength unite,
And, pouring on their foes, their prince delight.

Halesus came, fierce with desire of blood;
But first collected in his arms he stood:
Advancing then, he plied the spear so well,
Ladon, Demodocus, and Pheres fell.
Around his head he toss'd his glitt'ring brand,
And from Strymonius hew'd his better hand,
Held up to guard his throat; then hurl'd a stone
At Thoas' ample front, and pierc'd the bone:
It struck beneath the space of either eye;
And blood, and mingled brains, together fly.
Deep skill'd in future fates, Halesus' sire
Did with the youth to lonely groves retire:
But, when the father's mortal race was run,
Dire destiny laid hold upon the son,
And haul'd him to the war, to find, beneath
Th' Evandrian spear, a memorable death.
Pallas th' encounter seeks, but, ere he throws,
To Tuscan Tiber thus address'd his vows:
"O sacred stream, direct my flying dart,
And give to pass the proud Halesus' heart!
His arms and spoils thy holy oak shall bear."
Pleas'd with the bribe, the god receiv'd his pray'r:
For, while his shield protects a friend distress'd,
The dart came driving on, and pierc'd his breast.

But Lausus, no small portion of the war,
Permits not panic fear to reign too far,
Caus'd by the death of so renown'd a knight;
But by his own example cheers the fight.
Fierce Abas first he slew; Abas, the stay
Of Trojan hopes, and hindrance of the day.
The Phrygian troops escap'd the Greeks in vain:
They, and their mix'd allies, now load the plain.
To the rude shock of war both armies came;
Their leaders equal, and their strength the same.
The rear so press'd the front, they could not wield
Their angry weapons, to dispute the field.
Here Pallas urges on, and Lausus there:
Of equal youth and beauty both appear,
But both by fate forbid to breathe their native air.
Their congress in the field great Jove withstands:
Both doom'd to fall, but fall by greater hands.

Meantime Juturna warns the Daunian chief
Of Lausus' danger, urging swift relief.
With his driv'n chariot he divides the crowd,
And, making to his friends, thus calls aloud:
"Let none presume his needless aid to join;
Retire, and clear the field; the fight is mine:
To this right hand is Pallas only due;
O were his father here, my just revenge to view!"
From the forbidden space his men retir'd.
Pallas their awe, and his stern words, admir'd;
Survey'd him o'er and o'er with wond'ring sight,
Struck with his haughty mien, and tow'ring height.
Then to the king: "Your empty vaunts forbear;
Success I hope, and fate I cannot fear;
Alive or dead, I shall deserve a name;
Jove is impartial, and to both the same."
He said, and to the void advanc'd his pace:
Pale horror sate on each Arcadian face.
Then Turnus, from his chariot leaping light,
Address'd himself on foot to single fight.
And, as a lion- when he spies from far
A bull that seems to meditate the war,
Bending his neck, and spurning back the sand-
Runs roaring downward from his hilly stand:
Imagine eager Turnus not more slow,
To rush from high on his unequal foe.

Young Pallas, when he saw the chief advance
Within due distance of his flying lance,
Prepares to charge him first, resolv'd to try
If fortune would his want of force supply;
And thus to Heav'n and Hercules address'd:
"Alcides, once on earth Evander's guest,
His son adjures you by those holy rites,
That hospitable board, those genial nights;
Assist my great attempt to gain this prize,
And let proud Turnus view, with dying eyes,
His ravish'd spoils." 'T was heard, the vain request;
Alcides mourn'd, and stifled sighs within his breast.
Then Jove, to soothe his sorrow, thus began:
"Short bounds of life are set to mortal man.
'T is virtue's work alone to stretch the narrow span.
So many sons of gods, in bloody fight,
Around the walls of Troy, have lost the light:
My own Sarpedon fell beneath his foe;
Nor I, his mighty sire, could ward the blow.
Ev'n Turnus shortly shall resign his breath,
And stands already on the verge of death."
This said, the god permits the fatal fight,
But from the Latian fields averts his sight.

Now with full force his spear young Pallas threw,
And, having thrown, his shining fauchion drew
The steel just graz'd along the shoulder joint,
And mark'd it slightly with the glancing point,
Fierce Turnus first to nearer distance drew,
And pois'd his pointed spear, before he threw:
Then, as the winged weapon whizz'd along,
"See now," said he, "whose arm is better strung."
The spear kept on the fatal course, unstay'd
By plates of ir'n, which o'er the shield were laid:
Thro' folded brass and tough bull hides it pass'd,
His corslet pierc'd, and reach'd his heart at last.
In vain the youth tugs at the broken wood;
The soul comes issuing with the vital blood:
He falls; his arms upon his body sound;
And with his bloody teeth he bites the ground.

Turnus bestrode the corpse: "Arcadians, hear,"
Said he; "my message to your master bear:
Such as the sire deserv'd, the son I send;
It costs him dear to be the Phrygians' friend.
The lifeless body, tell him, I bestow,
Unask'd, to rest his wand'ring ghost below."
He said, and trampled down with all the force
Of his left foot, and spurn'd the wretched corse;
Then snatch'd the shining belt, with gold inlaid;
The belt Eurytion's artful hands had made,
Where fifty fatal brides, express'd to sight,
All in the compass of one mournful night,
Depriv'd their bridegrooms of returning light.

In an ill hour insulting Turnus tore
Those golden spoils, and in a worse he wore.
O mortals, blind in fate, who never know
To bear high fortune, or endure the low!
The time shall come, when Turnus, but in vain,
Shall wish untouch'd the trophies of the slain;
Shall wish the fatal belt were far away,
And curse the dire remembrance of the day.

The sad Arcadians, from th' unhappy field,
Bear back the breathless body on a shield.
O grace and grief of war! at once restor'd,
With praises, to thy sire, at once deplor'd!
One day first sent thee to the fighting field,
Beheld whole heaps of foes in battle kill'd;
One day beheld thee dead, and borne upon thy shield.
This dismal news, not from uncertain fame,
But sad spectators, to the hero came:
His friends upon the brink of ruin stand,
Unless reliev'd by his victorious hand.
He whirls his sword around, without delay,
And hews thro' adverse foes an ample way,
To find fierce Turnus, of his conquest proud:
Evander, Pallas, all that friendship ow'd
To large deserts, are present to his eyes;
His plighted hand, and hospitable ties.

Four sons of Sulmo, four whom Ufens bred,
He took in fight, and living victims led,
To please the ghost of Pallas, and expire,
In sacrifice, before his fun'ral fire.
At Magus next he threw: he stoop'd below
The flying spear, and shunn'd the promis'd blow;
Then, creeping, clasp'd the hero's knees, and pray'd:
"By young Iulus, by thy father's shade,
O spare my life, and send me back to see
My longing sire, and tender progeny!
A lofty house I have, and wealth untold,
In silver ingots, and in bars of gold:
All these, and sums besides, which see no day,
The ransom of this one poor life shall pay.
If I survive, will Troy the less prevail?
A single soul's too light to turn the scale."
He said. The hero sternly thus replied:
"Thy bars and ingots, and the sums beside,
Leave for thy children's lot. Thy Turnus broke
All rules of war by one relentless stroke,
When Pallas fell: so deems, nor deems alone
My father's shadow, but my living son."
Thus having said, of kind remorse bereft,
He seiz'd his helm, and dragg'd him with his left;
Then with his right hand, while his neck he wreath'd,
Up to the hilts his shining fauchion sheath'd.

Apollo's priest, Emonides, was near;
His holy fillets on his front appear;
Glitt'ring in arms, he shone amidst the crowd;
Much of his god, more of his purple, proud.
Him the fierce Trojan follow'd thro' the field:
The holy coward fell; and, forc'd to yield,
The prince stood o'er the priest, and, at one blow,
Sent him an off'ring to the shades below.
His arms Seresthus on his shoulders bears,
Design'd a trophy to the God of Wars.

Vulcanian Caeculus renews the fight,
And Umbro, born upon the mountains' height.
The champion cheers his troops t' encounter those,
And seeks revenge himself on other foes.
At Anxur's shield he drove; and, at the blow,
Both shield and arm to ground together go.
Anxur had boasted much of magic charms,
And thought he wore impenetrable arms,
So made by mutter'd spells; and, from the spheres,
Had life secur'd, in vain, for length of years.
Then Tarquitus the field in triumph trod;
A nymph his mother, his sire a god.
Exulting in bright arms, he braves the prince:
With his protended lance he makes defense;
Bears back his feeble foe; then, pressing on,
Arrests his better hand, and drags him down;
Stands o'er the prostrate wretch, and, as he lay,
Vain tales inventing, and prepar'd to pray,
Mows off his head: the trunk a moment stood,
Then sunk, and roll'd along the sand in blood.
The vengeful victor thus upbraids the slain:
"Lie there, proud man, unpitied, on the plain;
Lie there, inglorious, and without a tomb,
Far from thy mother and thy native home,
Exposed to savage beasts, and birds of prey,
Or thrown for food to monsters of the sea."

On Lycas and Antaeus next he ran,
Two chiefs of Turnus, and who led his van.
They fled for fear; with these, he chas'd along
Camers the yellow-lock'd, and Numa strong;
Both great in arms, and both were fair and young.
Camers was son to Volscens lately slain,
In wealth surpassing all the Latian train,
And in Amycla fix'd his silent easy reign.
And, as Aegaeon, when with heav'n he strove,
Stood opposite in arms to mighty Jove;
Mov'd all his hundred hands, provok'd the war,
Defied the forky lightning from afar;
At fifty mouths his flaming breath expires,
And flash for flash returns, and fires for fires;
In his right hand as many swords he wields,
And takes the thunder on as many shields:
With strength like his, the Trojan hero stood;
And soon the fields with falling corps were strow'd,
When once his fauchion found the taste of blood.
With fury scarce to be conceiv'd, he flew
Against Niphaeus, whom four coursers drew.
They, when they see the fiery chief advance,
And pushing at their chests his pointed lance,
Wheel'd with so swift a motion, mad with fear,
They threw their master headlong from the chair.
They stare, they start, nor stop their course, before
They bear the bounding chariot to the shore.

Now Lucagus and Liger scour the plains,
With two white steeds; but Liger holds the reins,
And Lucagus the lofty seat maintains:
Bold brethren both. The former wav'd in air
His flaming sword: Aeneas couch'd his spear,
Unus'd to threats, and more unus'd to fear.
Then Liger thus: "Thy confidence is vain
To scape from hence, as from the Trojan plain:
Nor these the steeds which Diomede bestrode,
Nor this the chariot where Achilles rode;
Nor Venus' veil is here, near Neptune's shield;
Thy fatal hour is come, and this the field."
Thus Liger vainly vaunts: the Trojan peer
Return'd his answer with his flying spear.
As Lucagus, to lash his horses, bends,
Prone to the wheels, and his left foot protends,
Prepar'd for fight; the fatal dart arrives,
And thro' the borders of his buckler drives;
Pass'd thro' and pierc'd his groin: the deadly wound,
Cast from his chariot, roll'd him on the ground.
Whom thus the chief upbraids with scornful spite:
"Blame not the slowness of your steeds in flight;
Vain shadows did not force their swift retreat;
But you yourself forsake your empty seat."
He said, and seiz'd at once the loosen'd rein;
For Liger lay already on the plain,
By the same shock: then, stretching out his hands,
The recreant thus his wretched life demands:
"Now, by thyself, O more than mortal man!
By her and him from whom thy breath began,
Who form'd thee thus divine, I beg thee, spare
This forfeit life, and hear thy suppliant's pray'r."
Thus much he spoke, and more he would have said;
But the stern hero turn'd aside his head,
And cut him short: "I hear another man;
You talk'd not thus before the fight began.
Now take your turn; and, as a brother should,
Attend your brother to the Stygian flood."
Then thro' his breast his fatal sword he sent,
And the soul issued at the gaping vent.

As storms the skies, and torrents tear the ground,
Thus rag'd the prince, and scatter'd deaths around.
At length Ascanius and the Trojan train
Broke from the camp, so long besieg'd in vain.

Meantime the King of Gods and Mortal Man
Held conference with his queen, and thus began:
"My sister goddess, and well-pleasing wife,
Still think you Venus' aid supports the strife-
Sustains her Trojans- or themselves, alone,
With inborn valor force their fortune on?
How fierce in fight, with courage undecay'd!
Judge if such warriors want immortal aid."
To whom the goddess with the charming eyes,
Soft in her tone, submissively replies:
"Why, O my sov'reign lord, whose frown I fear,
And cannot, unconcern'd, your anger bear;
Why urge you thus my grief? when, if I still
(As once I was) were mistress of your will,
From your almighty pow'r your pleasing wife
Might gain the grace of length'ning Turnus' life,
Securely snatch him from the fatal fight,
And give him to his aged father's sight.
Now let him perish, since you hold it good,
And glut the Trojans with his pious blood.
Yet from our lineage he derives his name,
And, in the fourth degree, from god Pilumnus came;
Yet he devoutly pays you rites divine,
And offers daily incense at your shrine."

Then shortly thus the sov'reign god replied:
"Since in my pow'r and goodness you confide,
If for a little space, a lengthen'd span,
You beg reprieve for this expiring man,
I grant you leave to take your Turnus hence
From instant fate, and can so far dispense.
But, if some secret meaning lies beneath,
To save the short-liv'd youth from destin'd death,
Or if a farther thought you entertain,
To change the fates; you feed your hopes in vain."
To whom the goddess thus, with weeping eyes:
"And what if that request, your tongue denies,
Your heart should grant; and not a short reprieve,
But length of certain life, to Turnus give?
Now speedy death attends the guiltless youth,
If my presaging soul divines with truth;
Which, O! I wish, might err thro' causeless fears,
And you (for you have pow'r) prolong his years!"

Thus having said, involv'd in clouds, she flies,
And drives a storm before her thro' the skies.
Swift she descends, alighting on the plain,
Where the fierce foes a dubious fight maintain.
Of air condens'd a specter soon she made;
And, what Aeneas was, such seem'd the shade.
Adorn'd with Dardan arms, the phantom bore
His head aloft; a plumy crest he wore;
This hand appear'd a shining sword to wield,
And that sustain'd an imitated shield.
With manly mien he stalk'd along the ground,
Nor wanted voice belied, nor vaunting sound.
(Thus haunting ghosts appear to waking sight,
Or dreadful visions in our dreams by night.)
The specter seems the Daunian chief to dare,
And flourishes his empty sword in air.
At this, advancing, Turnus hurl'd his spear:
The phantom wheel'd, and seem'd to fly for fear.
Deluded Turnus thought the Trojan fled,
And with vain hopes his haughty fancy fed.
"Whether, O coward?" (thus he calls aloud,
Nor found he spoke to wind, and chas'd a cloud,)
"Why thus forsake your bride! Receive from me
The fated land you sought so long by sea."
He said, and, brandishing at once his blade,
With eager pace pursued the flying shade.
By chance a ship was fasten'd to the shore,
Which from old Clusium King Osinius bore:
The plank was ready laid for safe ascent;
For shelter there the trembling shadow bent,
And skipp't and skulk'd, and under hatches went.
Exulting Turnus, with regardless haste,
Ascends the plank, and to the galley pass'd.
Scarce had he reach'd the prow: Saturnia's hand
The haulsers cuts, and shoots the ship from land.
With wind in poop, the vessel plows the sea,
And measures back with speed her former way.
Meantime Aeneas seeks his absent foe,
And sends his slaughter'd troops to shades below.

The guileful phantom now forsook the shroud,
And flew sublime, and vanish'd in a cloud.
Too late young Turnus the delusion found,
Far on the sea, still making from the ground.
Then, thankless for a life redeem'd by shame,
With sense of honor stung, and forfeit fame,
Fearful besides of what in fight had pass'd,
His hands and haggard eyes to heav'n he cast;
"O Jove!" he cried, "for what offense have
Deserv'd to bear this endless infamy?
Whence am I forc'd, and whether am I borne?
How, and with what reproach, shall I return?
Shall ever I behold the Latian plain,
Or see Laurentum's lofty tow'rs again?
What will they say of their deserting chief
The war was mine: I fly from their relief;
I led to slaughter, and in slaughter leave;
And ev'n from hence their dying groans receive.
Here, overmatch'd in fight, in heaps they lie;
There, scatter'd o'er the fields, ignobly fly.
Gape wide, O earth, and draw me down alive!
Or, O ye pitying winds, a wretch relieve!
On sands or shelves the splitting vessel drive;
Or set me shipwrack'd on some desart shore,
Where no Rutulian eyes may see me more,
Unknown to friends, or foes, or conscious Fame,
Lest she should follow, and my flight proclaim."

Thus Turnus rav'd, and various fates revolv'd:
The choice was doubtful, but the death resolv'd.
And now the sword, and now the sea took place,
That to revenge, and this to purge disgrace.
Sometimes he thought to swim the stormy main,
By stretch of arms the distant shore to gain.
Thrice he the sword assay'd, and thrice the flood;
But Juno, mov'd with pity, both withstood.
And thrice repress'd his rage; strong gales supplied,
And push'd the vessel o'er the swelling tide.
At length she lands him on his native shores,
And to his father's longing arms restores.

Meantime, by Jove's impulse, Mezentius arm'd,
Succeeding Turnus, with his ardor warm'd
His fainting friends, reproach'd their shameful flight,
Repell'd the victors, and renew'd the fight.
Against their king the Tuscan troops conspire;
Such is their hate, and such their fierce desire
Of wish'd revenge: on him, and him alone,
All hands employ'd, and all their darts are thrown.
He, like a solid rock by seas inclos'd,
To raging winds and roaring waves oppos'd,
From his proud summit looking down, disdains
Their empty menace, and unmov'd remains.

Beneath his feet fell haughty Hebrus dead,
Then Latagus, and Palmus as he fled.
At Latagus a weighty stone he flung:
His face was flatted, and his helmet rung.
But Palmus from behind receives his wound;
Hamstring'd he falls, and grovels on the ground:
His crest and armor, from his body torn,
Thy shoulders, Lausus, and thy head adorn.
Evas and Mimas, both of Troy, he slew.
Mimas his birth from fair Theano drew,
Born on that fatal night, when, big with fire,
The queen produc'd young Paris to his sire:
But Paris in the Phrygian fields was slain,
Unthinking Mimas on the Latian plain.

And, as a savage boar, on mountains bred,
With forest mast and fatt'ning marshes fed,
When once he sees himself in toils inclos'd,
By huntsmen and their eager hounds oppos'd-
He whets his tusks, and turns, and dares the war;
Th' invaders dart their jav'lins from afar:
All keep aloof, and safely shout around;
But none presumes to give a nearer wound:
He frets and froths, erects his bristled hide,
And shakes a grove of lances from his side:
Not otherwise the troops, with hate inspir'd,
And just revenge against the tyrant fir'd,
Their darts with clamor at a distance drive,
And only keep the languish'd war alive.

From Coritus came Acron to the fight,
Who left his spouse betroth'd, and unconsummate night.
Mezentius sees him thro' the squadrons ride,
Proud of the purple favors of his bride.
Then, as a hungry lion, who beholds
A gamesome goat, who frisks about the folds,
Or beamy stag, that grazes on the plain-
He runs, he roars, he shakes his rising mane,
He grins, and opens wide his greedy jaws;
The prey lies panting underneath his paws:
He fills his famish'd maw; his mouth runs o'er
With unchew'd morsels, while he churns the gore:
So proud Mezentius rushes on his foes,
And first unhappy Acron overthrows:
Stretch'd at his length, he spurns the swarthy ground;
The lance, besmear'd with blood, lies broken in the wound.
Then with disdain the haughty victor view'd
Orodes flying, nor the wretch pursued,
Nor thought the dastard's back deserv'd a wound,
But, running, gain'd th' advantage of the ground:
Then turning short, he met him face to face,
To give his victor the better grace.
Orodes falls, in equal fight oppress'd:
Mezentius fix'd his foot upon his breast,
And rested lance; and thus aloud he cries:
"Lo! here the champion of my rebels lies!"
The fields around with Io Paean! ring;
And peals of shouts applaud the conqu'ring king.
At this the vanquish'd, with his dying breath,
Thus faintly spoke, and prophesied in death:
"Nor thou, proud man, unpunish'd shalt remain:
Like death attends thee on this fatal plain."
Then, sourly smiling, thus the king replied:
"For what belongs to me, let Jove provide;
But die thou first, whatever chance ensue."
He said, and from the wound the weapon drew.
A hov'ring mist came swimming o'er his sight,
And seal'd his eyes in everlasting night.

By Caedicus, Alcathous was slain;
Sacrator laid Hydaspes on the plain;
Orses the strong to greater strength must yield;
He, with Parthenius, were by Rapo kill'd.
Then brave Messapus Ericetes slew,
Who from Lycaon's blood his lineage drew.
But from his headstrong horse his fate he found,
Who threw his master, as he made a bound:
The chief, alighting, stuck him to the ground;
Then Clonius, hand to hand, on foot assails:
The Trojan sinks, and Neptune's son prevails.
Agis the Lycian, stepping forth with pride,
To single fight the boldest foe defied;
Whom Tuscan Valerus by force o'ercame,
And not belied his mighty father's fame.
Salius to death the great Antronius sent:
But the same fate the victor underwent,
Slain by Nealces' hand, well-skill'd to throw
The flying dart, and draw the far-deceiving bow.

Thus equal deaths are dealt with equal chance;
By turns they quit their ground, by turns advance:
Victors and vanquish'd, in the various field,
Nor wholly overcome, nor wholly yield.
The gods from heav'n survey the fatal strife,
And mourn the miseries of human life.
Above the rest, two goddesses appear
Concern'd for each: here Venus, Juno there.
Amidst the crowd, infernal Ate shakes
Her scourge aloft, and crest of hissing snakes.

Once more the proud Mezentius, with disdain,
Brandish'd his spear, and rush'd into the plain,
Where tow'ring in the midmost rank she stood,
Like tall Orion stalking o'er the flood.
(When with his brawny breast he cuts the waves,
His shoulders scarce the topmost billow laves),
Or like a mountain ash, whose roots are spread,
Deep fix'd in earth; in clouds he hides his head.

The Trojan prince beheld him from afar,
And dauntless undertook the doubtful war.
Collected in his strength, and like a rock,
Pois'd on his base, Mezentius stood the shock.
He stood, and, measuring first with careful eyes
The space his spear could reach, aloud he cries:
"My strong right hand, and sword, assist my stroke!
(Those only gods Mezentius will invoke.)
His armor, from the Trojan pirate torn,
By my triumphant Lausus shall be worn."
He said; and with his utmost force he threw
The massy spear, which, hissing as it flew,
Reach'd the celestial shield, that stopp'd the course;
But, glancing thence, the yet unbroken force
Took a new bent obliquely, and betwixt
The side and bowels fam'd Anthores fix'd.
Anthores had from Argos travel'd far,
Alcides' friend, and brother of the war;
Till, tir'd with toils, fair Italy he chose,
And in Evander's palace sought repose.
Now, falling by another's wound, his eyes
He cast to heav'n, on Argos thinks, and dies.

The pious Trojan then his jav'lin sent;
The shield gave way; thro' treble plates it went
Of solid brass, of linen trebly roll'd,
And three bull hides which round the buckler fold.
All these it pass'd, resistless in the course,
Transpierc'd his thigh, and spent its dying force.
The gaping wound gush'd out a crimson flood.
The Trojan, glad with sight of hostile blood,
His faunchion drew, to closer fight address'd,
And with new force his fainting foe oppress'd.

His father's peril Lausus view'd with grief;
He sigh'd, he wept, he ran to his relief.
And here, heroic youth, 't is here I must
To thy immortal memory be just,
And sing an act so noble and so new,
Posterity will scarce believe 't is true.
Pain'd with his wound, and useless for the fight,
The father sought to save himself by flight:
Incumber'd, slow he dragg'd the spear along,
Which pierc'd his thigh, and in his buckler hung.
The pious youth, resolv'd on death, below
The lifted sword springs forth to face the foe;
Protects his parent, and prevents the blow.
Shouts of applause ran ringing thro' the field,
To see the son the vanquish'd father shield.
All, fir'd with gen'rous indignation, strive,
And with a storm of darts to distance drive
The Trojan chief, who, held at bay from far,
On his Vulcanian orb sustain'd the war.

As, when thick hail comes rattling in the wind,
The plowman, passenger, and lab'ring hind
For shelter to the neighb'ring covert fly,
Or hous'd, or safe in hollow caverns lie;
But, that o'erblown, when heav'n above 'em smiles,
Return to travel, and renew their toils:
Aeneas thus, o'erwhelmed on ev'ry side,
The storm of darts, undaunted, did abide;
And thus to Lausus loud with friendly threat'ning cried:
"Why wilt thou rush to certain death, and rage
In rash attempts, beyond thy tender age,
Betray'd by pious love?" Nor, thus forborne,
The youth desists, but with insulting scorn
Provokes the ling'ring prince, whose patience, tir'd,
Gave place; and all his breast with fury fir'd.
For now the Fates prepar'd their sharpen'd shears;
And lifted high the flaming sword appears,
Which, full descending with a frightful sway,
Thro' shield and corslet forc'd th' impetuous way,
And buried deep in his fair bosom lay.
The purple streams thro' the thin armor strove,
And drench'd th' imbroider'd coat his mother wove;
And life at length forsook his heaving heart,
Loth from so sweet a mansion to depart.

But when, with blood and paleness all o'erspread,
The pious prince beheld young Lausus dead,
He griev'd; he wept; the sight an image brought
Of his own filial love, a sadly pleasing thought:
Then stretch'd his hand to hold him up, and said:
"Poor hapless youth! what praises can be paid
To love so great, to such transcendent store
Of early worth, and sure presage of more?
Accept whate'er Aeneas can afford;
Untouch'd thy arms, untaken be thy sword;
And all that pleas'd thee living, still remain
Inviolate, and sacred to the slain.
Thy body on thy parents I bestow,
To rest thy soul, at least, if shadows know,
Or have a sense of human things below.
There to thy fellow ghosts with glory tell:
''T was by the great Aeneas hand I fell.'"
With this, his distant friends he beckons near,
Provokes their duty, and prevents their fear:
Himself assists to lift him from the ground,
With clotted locks, and blood that well'd from out the wound.

Meantime, his father, now no father, stood,
And wash'd his wounds by Tiber's yellow flood:
Oppress'd with anguish, panting, and o'erspent,
His fainting limbs against an oak he leant.
A bough his brazen helmet did sustain;
His heavier arms lay scatter'd on the plain:
A chosen train of youth around him stand;
His drooping head was rested on his hand:
His grisly beard his pensive bosom sought;
And all on Lausus ran his restless thought.
Careful, concern'd his danger to prevent,
He much enquir'd, and many a message sent
To warn him from the field- alas! in vain!
Behold, his mournful followers bear him slain!
O'er his broad shield still gush'd the yawning wound,
And drew a bloody trail along the ground.
Far off he heard their cries, far off divin'd
The dire event, with a foreboding mind.
With dust he sprinkled first his hoary head;
Then both his lifted hands to heav'n he spread;
Last, the dear corpse embracing, thus he said:
"What joys, alas! could this frail being give,
That I have been so covetous to live?
To see my son, and such a son, resign
His life, a ransom for preserving mine!
And am I then preserv'd, and art thou lost?
How much too dear has that redemption cost!
'T is now my bitter banishment I feel:
This is a wound too deep for time to heal.
My guilt thy growing virtues did defame;
My blackness blotted thy unblemish'd name.
Chas'd from a throne, abandon'd, and exil'd
For foul misdeeds, were punishments too mild:
I ow'd my people these, and, from their hate,
With less resentment could have borne my fate.
And yet I live, and yet sustain the sight
Of hated men, and of more hated light:
But will not long." With that he rais'd from ground
His fainting limbs, that stagger'd with his wound;
Yet, with a mind resolv'd, and unappall'd
With pains or perils, for his courser call'd
Well-mouth'd, well-manag'd, whom himself did dress
With daily care, and mounted with success;
His aid in arms, his ornament in peace.

Soothing his courage with a gentle stroke,
The steed seem'd sensible, while thus he spoke:
"O Rhoebus, we have liv'd too long for me-
If life and long were terms that could agree!
This day thou either shalt bring back the head
And bloody trophies of the Trojan dead;
This day thou either shalt revenge my woe,
For murther'd Lausus, on his cruel foe;
Or, if inexorable fate deny
Our conquest, with thy conquer'd master die:
For, after such a lord, I rest secure,
Thou wilt no foreign reins, or Trojan load endure."
He said; and straight th' officious courser kneels,
To take his wonted weight. His hands he fills
With pointed jav'lins; on his head he lac'd
His glitt'ring helm, which terribly was grac'd
With waving horsehair, nodding from afar;
Then spurr'd his thund'ring steed amidst the war.
Love, anguish, wrath, and grief, to madness wrought,
Despair, and secret shame, and conscious thought
Of inborn worth, his lab'ring soul oppress'd,
Roll'd in his eyes, and rag'd within his breast.
Then loud he call'd Aeneas thrice by name:
The loud repeated voice to glad Aeneas came.
"Great Jove," he said, "and the far-shooting god,
Inspire thy mind to make thy challenge good!"
He spoke no more; but hasten'd, void of fear,
And threaten'd with his long protended spear.

To whom Mezentius thus: "Thy vaunts are vain.
My Lausus lies extended on the plain:
He's lost! thy conquest is already won;
The wretched sire is murther'd in the son.
Nor fate I fear, but all the gods defy.
Forbear thy threats: my bus'ness is to die;
But first receive this parting legacy."
He said; and straight a whirling dart he sent;
Another after, and another went.
Round in a spacious ring he rides the field,
And vainly plies th' impenetrable shield.
Thrice rode he round; and thrice Aeneas wheel'd,
Turn'd as he turn'd: the golden orb withstood
The strokes, and bore about an iron wood.
Impatient of delay, and weary grown,
Still to defend, and to defend alone,
To wrench the darts which in his buckler light,
Urg'd and o'er-labor'd in unequal fight;
At length resolv'd, he throws with all his force
Full at the temples of the warrior horse.
Just where the stroke was aim'd, th' unerring spear
Made way, and stood transfix'd thro' either ear.
Seiz'd with unwonted pain, surpris'd with fright,
The wounded steed curvets, and, rais'd upright,
Lights on his feet before; his hoofs behind
Spring up in air aloft, and lash the wind.
Down comes the rider headlong from his height:
His horse came after with unwieldy weight,
And, flound'ring forward, pitching on his head,
His lord's incumber'd shoulder overlaid.

From either host, the mingled shouts and cries
Of Trojans and Rutulians rend the skies.
Aeneas, hast'ning, wav'd his fatal sword
High o'er his head, with this reproachful word:
"Now; where are now thy vaunts, the fierce disdain
Of proud Mezentius, and the lofty strain?"

Struggling, and wildly staring on the skies,
With scarce recover'd sight he thus replies:
"Why these insulting words, this waste of breath,
To souls undaunted, and secure of death?
'T is no dishonor for the brave to die,
Nor came I here with hope victory;
Nor ask I life, nor fought with that design:
As I had us'd my fortune, use thou thine.
My dying son contracted no such band;
The gift is hateful from his murd'rer's hand.
For this, this only favor let me sue,
If pity can to conquer'd foes be due:
Refuse it not; but let my body have
The last retreat of humankind, a grave.
Too well I know th' insulting people's hate;
Protect me from their vengeance after fate:
This refuge for my poor remains provide,
And lay my much-lov'd Lausus by my side."
He said, and to the sword his throat applied.
The crimson stream distain'd his arms around,
And the disdainful soul came rushing thro' the wound.





Scarce had the rosy Morning rais'd her head
Above the waves, and left her wat'ry bed;
The pious chief, whom double cares attend
For his unburied soldiers and his friend,
Yet first to Heav'n perform'd a victor's vows:
He bar'd an ancient oak of all her boughs;
Then on a rising ground the trunk he plac'd,
Which with the spoils of his dead foe he grac'd.
The coat of arms by proud Mezentius worn,
Now on a naked snag in triumph borne,
Was hung on high, and glitter'd from afar,
A trophy sacred to the God of War.
Above his arms, fix'd on the leafless wood,
Appear'd his plumy crest, besmear'd with blood:
His brazen buckler on the left was seen;
Truncheons of shiver'd lances hung between;
And on the right was placed his corslet, bor'd;
And to the neck was tied his unavailing sword.

A crowd of chiefs inclose the godlike man,
Who thus, conspicuous in the midst, began:
"Our toils, my friends, are crown'd with sure success;
The greater part perform'd, achieve the less.
Now follow cheerful to the trembling town;
Press but an entrance, and presume it won.
Fear is no more, for fierce Mezentius lies,
As the first fruits of war, a sacrifice.
Turnus shall fall extended on the plain,
And, in this omen, is already slain.
Prepar'd in arms, pursue your happy chance;
That none unwarn'd may plead his ignorance,
And I, at Heav'n's appointed hour, may find
Your warlike ensigns waving in the wind.
Meantime the rites and fun'ral pomps prepare,
Due to your dead companions of the war:
The last respect the living can bestow,
To shield their shadows from contempt below.
That conquer'd earth be theirs, for which they fought,
And which for us with their own blood they bought;
But first the corpse of our unhappy friend
To the sad city of Evander send,
Who, not inglorious, in his age's bloom,
Was hurried hence by too severe a doom."

Thus, weeping while he spoke, he took his way,
Where, new in death, lamented Pallas lay.
Acoetes watch'd the corpse; whose youth deserv'd
The father's trust; and now the son he serv'd
With equal faith, but less auspicious care.
Th' attendants of the slain his sorrow share.
A troop of Trojans mix'd with these appear,
And mourning matrons with dishevel'd hair.
Soon as the prince appears, they raise a cry;
All beat their breasts, and echoes rend the sky.
They rear his drooping forehead from the ground;
But, when Aeneas view'd the grisly wound
Which Pallas in his manly bosom bore,
And the fair flesh distain'd with purple gore;
First, melting into tears, the pious man
Deplor'd so sad a sight, then thus began:
"Unhappy youth! when Fortune gave the rest
Of my full wishes, she refus'd the best!
She came; but brought not thee along, to bless
My longing eyes, and share in my success:
She grudg'd thy safe return, the triumphs due
To prosp'rous valor, in the public view.
Not thus I promis'd, when thy father lent
Thy needless succor with a sad consent;
Embrac'd me, parting for th' Etrurian land,
And sent me to possess a large command.
He warn'd, and from his own experience told,
Our foes were warlike, disciplin'd, and bold.
And now perhaps, in hopes of thy return,
Rich odors on his loaded altars burn,
While we, with vain officious pomp, prepare
To send him back his portion of the war,
A bloody breathless body, which can owe
No farther debt, but to the pow'rs below.
The wretched father, ere his race is run,
Shall view the fun'ral honors of his son.
These are my triumphs of the Latian war,
Fruits of my plighted faith and boasted care!
And yet, unhappy sire, thou shalt not see
A son whose death disgrac'd his ancestry;
Thou shalt not blush, old man, however griev'd:
Thy Pallas no dishonest wound receiv'd.
He died no death to make thee wish, too late,
Thou hadst not liv'd to see his shameful fate:
But what a champion has th' Ausonian coast,
And what a friend hast thou, Ascanius, lost!"

Thus having mourn'd, he gave the word around,
To raise the breathless body from the ground;
And chose a thousand horse, the flow'r of all
His warlike troops, to wait the funeral,
To bear him back and share Evander's grief:
A well-becoming, but a weak relief.
Of oaken twigs they twist an easy bier,
Then on their shoulders the sad burden rear.
The body on this rural hearse is borne:
Strew'd leaves and funeral greens the bier adorn.
All pale he lies, and looks a lovely flow'r,
New cropp'd by virgin hands, to dress the bow'r:
Unfaded yet, but yet unfed below,
No more to mother earth or the green stern shall owe.
Then two fair vests, of wondrous work and cost,
Of purple woven, and with gold emboss'd,
For ornament the Trojan hero brought,
Which with her hands Sidonian Dido wrought.
One vest array'd the corpse; and one they spread
O'er his clos'd eyes, and wrapp'd around his head,
That, when the yellow hair in flame should fall,
The catching fire might burn the golden caul.
Besides, the spoils of foes in battle slain,
When he descended on the Latian plain;
Arms, trappings, horses, by the hearse are led
In long array- th' achievements of the dead.
Then, pinion'd with their hands behind, appear
Th' unhappy captives, marching in the rear,
Appointed off'rings in the victor's name,
To sprinkle with their blood the fun'ral flame.
Inferior trophies by the chiefs are borne;
Gauntlets and helms their loaded hands adorn;
And fair inscriptions fix'd, and titles read
Of Latian leaders conquer'd by the dead.

Acoetes on his pupil's corpse attends,
With feeble steps, supported by his friends.
Pausing at ev'ry pace, in sorrow drown'd,
Betwixt their arms he sinks upon the ground;
Where grov'ling while he lies in deep despair,
He beats his breast, and rends his hoary hair.
The champion's chariot next is seen to roll,
Besmear'd with hostile blood, and honorably foul.
To close the pomp, Aethon, the steed of state,
Is led, the fun'rals of his lord to wait.
Stripp'd of his trappings, with a sullen pace
He walks; and the big tears run rolling down his face.
The lance of Pallas, and the crimson crest,
Are borne behind: the victor seiz'd the rest.
The march begins: the trumpets hoarsely sound;
The pikes and lances trail along the ground.
Thus while the Trojan and Arcadian horse
To Pallantean tow'rs direct their course,
In long procession rank'd, the pious chief
Stopp'd in the rear, and gave a vent to grief:
"The public care," he said, "which war attends,
Diverts our present woes, at least suspends.
Peace with the manes of great Pallas dwell!
Hail, holy relics! and a last farewell!"
He said no more, but, inly thro' he mourn'd,
Restrained his tears, and to the camp return'd.

Now suppliants, from Laurentum sent, demand
A truce, with olive branches in their hand;
Obtest his clemency, and from the plain
Beg leave to draw the bodies of their slain.
They plead, that none those common rites deny
To conquer'd foes that in fair battle die.
All cause of hate was ended in their death;
Nor could he war with bodies void of breath.
A king, they hop'd, would hear a king's request,
Whose son he once was call'd, and once his guest.

Their suit, which was too just to be denied,
The hero grants, and farther thus replied:
"O Latian princes, how severe a fate
In causeless quarrels has involv'd your state,
And arm'd against an unoffending man,
Who sought your friendship ere the war began!
You beg a truce, which I would gladly give,
Not only for the slain, but those who live.
I came not hither but by Heav'n's command,
And sent by fate to share the Latian land.
Nor wage I wars unjust: your king denied
My proffer'd friendship, and my promis'd bride;
Left me for Turnus. Turnus then should try
His cause in arms, to conquer or to die.
My right and his are in dispute: the slain
Fell without fault, our quarrel to maintain.
In equal arms let us alone contend;
And let him vanquish, whom his fates befriend.
This is the way (so tell him) to possess
The royal virgin, and restore the peace.
Bear this message back, with ample leave,
That your slain friends may fun'ral rites receive."

Thus having said- th' embassadors, amaz'd,
Stood mute a while, and on each other gaz'd.
Drances, their chief, who harbor'd in his breast
Long hate to Turnus, as his foe profess'd,
Broke silence first, and to the godlike man,
With graceful action bowing, thus began:
"Auspicious prince, in arms a mighty name,
But yet whose actions far transcend your fame;
Would I your justice or your force express,
Thought can but equal; and all words are less.
Your answer we shall thankfully relate,
And favors granted to the Latian state.
If wish'd success our labor shall attend,
Think peace concluded, and the king your friend:
Let Turnus leave the realm to your command,
And seek alliance in some other land:
Build you the city which your fates assign;
We shall be proud in the great work to join."

Thus Drances; and his words so well persuade
The rest impower'd, that soon a truce is made.
Twelve days the term allow'd: and, during those,
Latians and Trojans, now no longer foes,
Mix'd in the woods, for fun'ral piles prepare
To fell the timber, and forget the war.
Loud axes thro' the groaning groves resound;
Oak, mountain ash, and poplar spread the ground;
First fall from high; and some the trunks receive
In loaden wains; with wedges some they cleave.

And now the fatal news by Fame is blown
Thro' the short circuit of th' Arcadian town,
Of Pallas slain- by Fame, which just before
His triumphs on distended pinions bore.
Rushing from out the gate, the people stand,
Each with a fun'ral flambeau in his hand.
Wildly they stare, distracted with amaze:
The fields are lighten'd with a fiery blaze,
That cast a sullen splendor on their friends,
The marching troop which their dead prince attends.
Both parties meet: they raise a doleful cry;
The matrons from the walls with shrieks reply,
And their mix'd mourning rends the vaulted sky.
The town is fill'd with tumult and with tears,
Till the loud clamors reach Evander's ears:
Forgetful of his state, he runs along,
With a disorder'd pace, and cleaves the throng;
Falls on the corpse; and groaning there he lies,
With silent grief, that speaks but at his eyes.
Short sighs and sobs succeed; till sorrow breaks
A passage, and at once he weeps and speaks:

"O Pallas! thou hast fail'd thy plighted word,
To fight with caution, not to tempt the sword!
I warn'd thee, but in vain; for well I knew
What perils youthful ardor would pursue,
That boiling blood would carry thee too far,
Young as thou wert in dangers, raw to war!
O curst essay of arms, disastrous doom,
Prelude of bloody fields, and fights to come!
Hard elements of unauspicious war,
Vain vows to Heav'n, and unavailing care!
Thrice happy thou, dear partner of my bed,
Whose holy soul the stroke of Fortune fled,
Praescious of ills, and leaving me behind,
To drink the dregs of life by fate assign'd!
Beyond the goal of nature I have gone:
My Pallas late set out, but reach'd too soon.
If, for my league against th' Ausonian state,
Amidst their weapons I had found my fate,
(Deserv'd from them,) then I had been return'd
A breathless victor, and my son had mourn'd.
Yet will I not my Trojan friend upbraid,
Nor grudge th' alliance I so gladly made.
'T was not his fault, my Pallas fell so young,
But my own crime, for having liv'd too long.
Yet, since the gods had destin'd him to die,
At least he led the way to victory:
First for his friends he won the fatal shore,
And sent whole herds of slaughter'd foes before;
A death too great, too glorious to deplore.
Nor will I add new honors to thy grave,
Content with those the Trojan hero gave:
That funeral pomp thy Phrygian friends design'd,
In which the Tuscan chiefs and army join'd.
Great spoils and trophies, gain'd by thee, they bear:
Then let thy own achievements be thy share.
Even thou, O Turnus, hadst a trophy stood,
Whose mighty trunk had better grac'd the wood,
If Pallas had arriv'd, with equal length
Of years, to match thy bulk with equal strength.
But why, unhappy man, dost thou detain
These troops, to view the tears thou shedd'st in vain?
Go, friends, this message to your lord relate:
Tell him, that, if I bear my bitter fate,
And, after Pallas' death, live ling'ring on,
'T is to behold his vengeance for my son.
I stay for Turnus, whose devoted head
Is owing to the living and the dead.
My son and I expect it from his hand;
'T is all that he can give, or we demand.
Joy is no more; but I would gladly go,
To greet my Pallas with such news below."

The morn had now dispell'd the shades of night,
Restoring toils, when she restor'd the light.
The Trojan king and Tuscan chief command
To raise the piles along the winding strand.
Their friends convey the dead fun'ral fires;
Black smold'ring smoke from the green wood expires;
The light of heav'n is chok'd, and the new day retires.
Then thrice around the kindled piles they go
(For ancient custom had ordain'd it so)
Thrice horse and foot about the fires are led;
And thrice, with loud laments, they hail the dead.
Tears, trickling down their breasts, bedew the ground,
And drums and trumpets mix their mournful sound.
Amid the blaze, their pious brethren throw
The spoils, in battle taken from the foe:
Helms, bits emboss'd, and swords of shining steel;
One casts a target, one a chariot wheel;
Some to their fellows their own arms restore:
The fauchions which in luckless fight they bore,
Their bucklers pierc'd, their darts bestow'd in vain,
And shiver'd lances gather'd from the plain.
Whole herds of offer'd bulls, about the fire,
And bristled boars, and woolly sheep expire.
Around the piles a careful troop attends,
To watch the wasting flames, and weep their burning friends;
Ling'ring along the shore, till dewy night
New decks the face of heav'n with starry light.

The conquer'd Latians, with like pious care,
Piles without number for their dead prepare.
Part in the places where they fell are laid;
And part are to the neighb'ring fields convey'd.
The corps of kings, and captains of renown,
Borne off in state, are buried in the town;
The rest, unhonor'd, and without a name,
Are cast a common heap to feed the flame.
Trojans and Latians vie with like desires
To make the field of battle shine with fires,
And the promiscuous blaze to heav'n aspires.

Now had the morning thrice renew'd the light,
And thrice dispell'd the shadows of the night,
When those who round the wasted fires remain,
Perform the last sad office to the slain.
They rake the yet warm ashes from below;
These, and the bones unburn'd, in earth bestow;
These relics with their country rites they grace,
And raise a mount of turf to mark the place.

But, in the palace of the king, appears
A scene more solemn, and a pomp of tears.
Maids, matrons, widows, mix their common moans;
Orphans their sires, and sires lament their sons.
All in that universal sorrow share,
And curse the cause of this unhappy war:
A broken league, a bride unjustly sought,
A crown usurp'd, which with their blood is bought!
These are the crimes with which they load the name
Of Turnus, and on him alone exclaim:
"Let him who lords it o'er th' Ausonian land
Engage the Trojan hero hand to hand:
His is the gain; our lot is but to serve;
'T is just, the sway he seeks, he should deserve."
This Drances aggravates; and adds, with spite:
"His foe expects, and dares him to the fight."
Nor Turnus wants a party, to support
His cause and credit in the Latian court.
His former acts secure his present fame,
And the queen shades him with her mighty name.

While thus their factious minds with fury burn,
The legates from th' Aetolian prince return:
Sad news they bring, that, after all the cost
And care employ'd, their embassy is lost;
That Diomedes refus'd his aid in war,
Unmov'd with presents, and as deaf to pray'r.
Some new alliance must elsewhere be sought,
Or peace with Troy on hard conditions bought.

Latinus, sunk in sorrow, finds too late,
A foreign son is pointed out by fate;
And, till Aeneas shall Lavinia wed,
The wrath of Heav'n is hov'ring o'er his head.
The gods, he saw, espous'd the juster side,
When late their titles in the field were tried:
Witness the fresh laments, and fun'ral tears undried.
Thus, full of anxious thought, he summons all
The Latian senate to the council hall.
The princes come, commanded by their head,
And crowd the paths that to the palace lead.
Supreme in pow'r, and reverenc'd for his years,
He takes the throne, and in the midst appears.
Majestically sad, he sits in state,
And bids his envoys their success relate.

When Venulus began, the murmuring sound
Was hush'd, and sacred silence reign'd around.
"We have," said he, "perform'd your high command,
And pass'd with peril a long tract of land:
We reach'd the place desir'd; with wonder fill'd,
The Grecian tents and rising tow'rs beheld.
Great Diomede has compass'd round with walls
The city, which Argyripa he calls,
From his own Argos nam'd. We touch'd, with joy,
The royal hand that raz'd unhappy Troy.
When introduc'd, our presents first we bring,
Then crave an instant audience from the king.
His leave obtain'd, our native soil we name,
And tell th' important cause for which we came.
Attentively he heard us, while we spoke;
Then, with soft accents, and a pleasing look,
Made this return: 'Ausonian race, of old
Renown'd for peace, and for an age of gold,
What madness has your alter'd minds possess'd,
To change for war hereditary rest,
Solicit arms unknown, and tempt the sword,
A needless ill your ancestors abhorr'd?
We- for myself I speak, and all the name
Of Grecians, who to Troy's destruction came,
Omitting those who were in battle slain,
Or borne by rolling Simois to the main-
Not one but suffer'd, and too dearly bought
The prize of honor which in arms he sought;
Some doom'd to death, and some in exile driv'n.
Outcasts, abandon'd by the care of Heav'n;
So worn, so wretched, so despis'd a crew,
As ev'n old Priam might with pity view.
Witness the vessels by Minerva toss'd
In storms; the vengeful Capharean coast;
Th' Euboean rocks! the prince, whose brother led
Our armies to revenge his injur'd bed,
In Egypt lost! Ulysses with his men
Have seen Charybdis and the Cyclops' den.
Why should I name Idomeneus, in vain
Restor'd to scepters, and expell'd again?
Or young Achilles, by his rival slain?
Ev'n he, the King of Men, the foremost name
Of all the Greeks, and most renown'd by fame,
The proud revenger of another's wife,
Yet by his own adult'ress lost his life;
Fell at his threshold; and the spoils of Troy
The foul polluters of his bed enjoy.
The gods have envied me the sweets of life,
My much lov'd country, and my more lov'd wife:
Banish'd from both, I mourn; while in the sky,
Transform'd to birds, my lost companions fly:
Hov'ring about the coasts, they make their moan,
And cuff the cliffs with pinions not their own.
What squalid specters, in the dead of night,
Break my short sleep, and skim before my sight!
I might have promis'd to myself those harms,
Mad as I was, when I, with mortal arms,
Presum'd against immortal pow'rs to move,
And violate with wounds the Queen of Love.
Such arms this hand shall never more employ;
No hate remains with me to ruin'd Troy.
I war not with its dust; nor am I glad
To think of past events, or good or bad.
Your presents I return: whate'er you bring
To buy my friendship, send the Trojan king.
We met in fight; I know him, to my cost:
With what a whirling force his lance he toss'd!
Heav'ns! what a spring was in his arm, to throw!
How high he held his shield, and rose at ev'ry blow!
Had Troy produc'd two more his match in might,
They would have chang'd the fortune of the fight:
Th' invasion of the Greeks had been return'd,
Our empire wasted, and our cities burn'd.
The long defense the Trojan people made,
The war protracted, and the siege delay'd,
Were due to Hector's and this hero's hand:
Both brave alike, and equal in command;
Aeneas, not inferior in the field,
In pious reverence to the gods excell'd.
Make peace, ye Latians, and avoid with care
Th' impending dangers of a fatal war.'
He said no more; but, with this cold excuse,
Refus'd th' alliance, and advis'd a truce."

Thus Venulus concluded his report.
A jarring murmur fill'd the factious court:
As, when a torrent rolls with rapid force,
And dashes o'er the stones that stop the course,
The flood, constrain'd within a scanty space,
Roars horrible along th' uneasy race;
White foam in gath'ring eddies floats around;
The rocky shores rebellow to the sound.

The murmur ceas'd: then from his lofty throne
The king invok'd the gods, and thus begun:
"I wish, ye Latins, what we now debate
Had been resolv'd before it was too late.
Much better had it been for you and me,
Unforc'd by this our last necessity,
To have been earlier wise, than now to call
A council, when the foe surrounds the wall.
O citizens, we wage unequal war,
With men not only Heav'n's peculiar care,
But Heav'n's own race; unconquer'd in the field,
Or, conquer'd, yet unknowing how to yield.
What hopes you had in Diomedes, lay down:
Our hopes must center on ourselves alone.
Yet those how feeble, and, indeed, how vain,
You see too well; nor need my words explain.
Vanquish'd without resource; laid flat by fate;
Factions within, a foe without the gate!
Not but I grant that all perform'd their parts
With manly force, and with undaunted hearts:
With our united strength the war we wag'd;
With equal numbers, equal arms, engag'd.
You see th' event.- Now hear what I propose,
To save our friends, and satisfy our foes.
A tract of land the Latins have possess'd
Along the Tiber, stretching to the west,
Which now Rutulians and Auruncans till,
And their mix'd cattle graze the fruitful hill.
Those mountains fill'd with firs, that lower land,
If you consent, the Trojan shall command,
Call'd into part of what is ours; and there,
On terms agreed, the common country share.
There let'em build and settle, if they please;
Unless they choose once more to cross the seas,
In search of seats remote from Italy,
And from unwelcome inmates set us free.
Then twice ten galleys let us build with speed,
Or twice as many more, if more they need.
Materials are at hand; a well-grown wood
Runs equal with the margin of the flood:
Let them the number and the form assign;
The care and cost of all the stores be mine.
To treat the peace, a hundred senators
Shall be commission'd hence with ample pow'rs,
With olive the presents they shall bear,
A purple robe, a royal iv'ry chair,
And all the marks of sway that Latian monarchs wear,
And sums of gold. Among yourselves debate
This great affair, and save the sinking state."

Then Drances took the word, who grudg'd, long since,
The rising glories of the Daunian prince.
Factious and rich, bold at the council board,
But cautious in the field, he shunn'd the sword;
A close caballer, and tongue-valiant lord.
Noble his mother was, and near the throne;
But, what his father's parentage, unknown.
He rose, and took th' advantage of the times,
To load young Turnus with invidious crimes.
"Such truths, O king," said he, "your words contain,
As strike the sense, and all replies are vain;
Nor are your loyal subjects now to seek
What common needs require, but fear to speak.
Let him give leave of speech, that haughty man,
Whose pride this unauspicious war began;
For whose ambition (let me dare to say,
Fear set apart, tho' death is in my way)
The plains of Latium run with blood around.
So many valiant heroes bite the ground;
Dejected grief in ev'ry face appears;
A town in mourning, and a land in tears;
While he, th' undoubted author of our harms,
The man who menaces the gods with arms,
Yet, after all his boasts, forsook the fight,
And sought his safety in ignoble flight.
Now, best of kings, since you propose to send
Such bounteous presents to your Trojan friend;
Add yet a greater at our joint request,
One which he values more than all the rest:
Give him the fair Lavinia for his bride;
With that alliance let the league be tied,
And for the bleeding land a lasting peace provide.
Let insolence no longer awe the throne;
But, with a father's right, bestow your own.
For this maligner of the general good,
If still we fear his force, he must be woo'd;
His haughty godhead we with pray'rs implore,
Your scepter to release, and our just rights restore.
O cursed cause of all our ills, must we
Wage wars unjust, and fall in fight, for thee!
What right hast thou to rule the Latian state,
And send us out to meet our certain fate?
'T is a destructive war: from Turnus' hand
Our peace and public safety we demand.
Let the fair bride to the brave chief remain;
If not, the peace, without the pledge, is vain.
Turnus, I know you think me not your friend,
Nor will I much with your belief contend:
I beg your greatness not to give the law
In others' realms, but, beaten, to withdraw.
Pity your own, or pity our estate;
Nor twist our fortunes with your sinking fate.
Your interest is, the war should never cease;
But we have felt enough to wish the peace:
A land exhausted to the last remains,
Depopulated towns, and driven plains.
Yet, if desire of fame, and thirst of pow'r,
A beauteous princess, with a crown in dow'r,
So fire your mind, in arms assert your right,
And meet your foe, who dares you to the fight.
Mankind, it seems, is made for you alone;
We, but the slaves who mount you to the throne:
A base ignoble crowd, without a name,
Unwept, unworthy, of the fun'ral flame,
By duty bound to forfeit each his life,
That Turnus may possess a royal wife.
Permit not, mighty man, so mean a crew
Should share such triumphs, and detain from you
The post of honor, your undoubted due.
Rather alone your matchless force employ,
To merit what alone you must enjoy."

These words, so full of malice mix'd with art,
Inflam'd with rage the youthful hero's heart.
Then, groaning from the bottom of his breast,
He heav'd for wind, and thus his wrath express'd:
"You, Drances, never want a stream of words,
Then, when the public need requires our swords.
First in the council hall to steer the state,
And ever foremost in a tongue-debate,
While our strong walls secure us from the foe,
Ere yet with blood our ditches overflow:
But let the potent orator declaim,
And with the brand of coward blot my name;
Free leave is giv'n him, when his fatal hand
Has cover'd with more corps the sanguine strand,
And high as mine his tow'ring trophies stand.
If any doubt remains, who dares the most,
Let us decide it at the Trojan's cost,
And issue both abreast, where honor calls-
Foes are not far to seek without the walls-
Unless his noisy tongue can only fight,
And feet were giv'n him but to speed his flight.
I beaten from the field? I forc'd away?
Who, but so known a dastard, dares to say?
Had he but ev'n beheld the fight, his eyes
Had witness'd for me what his tongue denies:
What heaps of Trojans by this hand were slain,
And how the bloody Tiber swell'd the main.
All saw, but he, th' Arcadian troops retire
In scatter'd squadrons, and their prince expire.
The giant brothers, in their camp, have found,
I was not forc'd with ease to quit my ground.
Not such the Trojans tried me, when, inclos'd,
I singly their united arms oppos'd:
First forc'd an entrance thro' their thick array;
Then, glutted with their slaughter, freed my way.
'T is a destructive war? So let it be,
But to the Phrygian pirate, and to thee!
Meantime proceed to fill the people's ears
With false reports, their minds with panic fears:
Extol the strength of a twice-conquer'd race;
Our foes encourage, and our friends debase.
Believe thy fables, and the Trojan town
Triumphant stands; the Grecians are o'erthrown;
Suppliant at Hector's feet Achilles lies,
And Diomede from fierce Aeneas flies.
Say rapid Aufidus with awful dread
Runs backward from the sea, and hides his head,
When the great Trojan on his bank appears;
For that's as true as thy dissembled fears
Of my revenge. Dismiss that vanity:
Thou, Drances, art below a death from me.
Let that vile soul in that vile body rest;
The lodging is well worthy of the guest.

"Now, royal father, to the present state
Of our affairs, and of this high debate:
If in your arms thus early you diffide,
And think your fortune is already tried;
If one defeat has brought us down so low,
As never more in fields to meet the foe;
Then I conclude for peace: 't is time to treat,
And lie like vassals at the victor's feet.
But, O! if any ancient blood remains,
One drop of all our fathers', in our veins,
That man would I prefer before the rest,
Who dar'd his death with an undaunted breast;
Who comely fell, by no dishonest wound,
To shun that sight, and, dying, gnaw'd the ground.
But, if we still have fresh recruits in store,
If our confederates can afford us more;
If the contended field we bravely fought,
And not a bloodless victory was bought;
Their losses equal'd ours; and, for their slain,
With equal fires they fill'd the shining plain;
Why thus, unforc'd, should we so tamely yield,
And, ere the trumpet sounds, resign the field?
Good unexpected, evils unforeseen,
Appear by turns, as fortune shifts the scene:
Some, rais'd aloft, come tumbling down amain;
Then fall so hard, they bound and rise again.
If Diomede refuse his aid to lend,
The great Messapus yet remains our friend:
Tolumnius, who foretells events, is ours;
Th' Italian chiefs and princes join their pow'rs:
Nor least in number, nor in name the last,
Your own brave subjects have your cause embrac'd
Above the rest, the Volscian Amazon
Contains an army in herself alone,
And heads a squadron, terrible to sight,
With glitt'ring shields, in brazen armor bright.
Yet, if the foe a single fight demand,
And I alone the public peace withstand;
If you consent, he shall not be refus'd,
Nor find a hand to victory unus'd.
This new Achilles, let him take the field,
With fated armor, and Vulcanian shield!
For you, my royal father, and my fame,
I, Turnus, not the least of all my name,
Devote my soul. He calls me hand to hand,
And I alone will answer his demand.
Drances shall rest secure, and neither share
The danger, nor divide the prize of war."

While they debate, nor these nor those will yield,
Aeneas draws his forces to the field,
And moves his camp. The scouts with flying speed
Return, and thro' the frighted city spread
Th' unpleasing news, the Trojans are descried,
In battle marching by the river side,
And bending to the town. They take th' alarm:
Some tremble, some are bold; all in confusion arm.
Th' impetuous youth press forward to the field;
They clash the sword, and clatter on the shield:
The fearful matrons raise a screaming cry;
Old feeble men with fainter groans reply;
A jarring sound results, and mingles in the sky,
Like that of swans remurm'ring to the floods,
Or birds of diff'ring kinds in hollow woods.

Turnus th' occasion takes, and cries aloud:
"Talk on, ye quaint haranguers of the crowd:
Declaim in praise of peace, when danger calls,
And the fierce foes in arms approach the walls."
He said, and, turning short, with speedy pace,
Casts back a scornful glance, and quits the place:
"Thou, Volusus, the Volscian troops command
To mount; and lead thyself our Ardean band.
Messapus and Catillus, post your force
Along the fields, to charge the Trojan horse.
Some guard the passes, others man the wall;
Drawn up in arms, the rest attend my call."

They swarm from ev'ry quarter of the town,
And with disorder'd haste the rampires crown.
Good old Latinus, when he saw, too late,
The gath'ring storm just breaking on the state,
Dismiss'd the council till a fitter time,
And own'd his easy temper as his crime,
Who, forc'd against his reason, had complied
To break the treaty for the promis'd bride.

Some help to sink new trenches; others aid
To ram the stones, or raise the palisade.
Hoarse trumpets sound th' alarm; around the walls
Runs a distracted crew, whom their last labor calls.
A sad procession in the streets is seen,
Of matrons, that attend the mother queen:
High in her chair she sits, and, at her side,
With downcast eyes, appears the fatal bride.
They mount the cliff, where Pallas' temple stands;
Pray'rs in their mouths, and presents in their hands,
With censers first they fume the sacred shrine,
Then in this common supplication join:
"O patroness of arms, unspotted maid,
Propitious hear, and lend thy Latins aid!
Break short the pirate's lance; pronounce his fate,
And lay the Phrygian low before the gate."

Now Turnus arms for fight. His back and breast
Well-temper'd steel and scaly brass invest:
The cuishes which his brawny thighs infold
Are mingled metal damask'd o'er with gold.
His faithful fauchion sits upon his side;
Nor casque, nor crest, his manly features hide:
But, bare to view, amid surrounding friends,
With godlike grace, he from the tow'r descends.
Exulting in his strength, he seems to dare
His absent rival, and to promise war.
Freed from his keepers, thus, with broken reins,
The wanton courser prances o'er the plains,
Or in the pride of youth o'erleaps the mounds,
And snuffs the females in forbidden grounds.
Or seeks his wat'ring in the well-known flood,
To quench his thirst, and cool his fiery blood:
He swims luxuriant in the liquid plain,
And o'er his shoulder flows his waving mane:
He neighs, he snorts, he bears his head on high;
Before his ample chest the frothy waters fly.

Soon as the prince appears without the gate,
The Volscians, with their virgin leader, wait
His last commands. Then, with a graceful mien,
Lights from her lofty steed the warrior queen:
Her squadron imitates, and each descends;
Whose common suit Camilla thus commends:
"If sense of honor, if a soul secure
Of inborn worth, that can all tests endure,
Can promise aught, or on itself rely
Greatly to dare, to conquer or to die;
Then, I alone, sustain'd by these, will meet
The Tyrrhene troops, and promise their defeat.
Ours be the danger, ours the sole renown:
You, gen'ral, stay behind, and guard the town:"

Turnus a while stood mute, with glad surprise,
And on the fierce virago fix'd his eyes;
Then thus return'd: "O grace of Italy,
With what becoming thanks can I reply?
Not only words lie lab'ring in my breast,
But thought itself is by thy praise oppress'd.
Yet rob me not of all; but let me join
My toils, my hazard, and my fame, with thine.
The Trojan, not in stratagem unskill'd,
Sends his light horse before to scour the field:
Himself, thro' steep ascents and thorny brakes,
A larger compass to the city takes.
This news my scouts confirm, and I prepare
To foil his cunning, and his force to dare;
With chosen foot his passage to forelay,
And place an ambush in the winding way.
Thou, with thy Volscians, face the Tuscan horse;
The brave Messapus shall thy troops inforce
With those of Tibur, and the Latian band,
Subjected all to thy supreme command."
This said, he warns Messapus to the war,
Then ev'ry chief exhorts with equal care.
All thus encourag'd, his own troops he joins,
And hastes to prosecute his deep designs.

Inclos'd with hills, a winding valley lies,
By nature form'd for fraud, and fitted for surprise.
A narrow track, by human steps untrode,
Leads, thro' perplexing thorns, to this obscure abode.
High o'er the vale a steepy mountain stands,
Whence the surveying sight the nether ground commands.
The top is level, an offensive seat
Of war; and from the war a safe retreat:
For, on the right and left, is room to press
The foes at hand, or from afar distress;
To drive 'em headlong downward, and to pour
On their descending backs a stony show'r.
Thither young Turnus took the well-known way,
Possess'd the pass, and in blind ambush lay.

Meantime Latonian Phoebe, from the skies,
Beheld th' approaching war with hateful eyes,
And call'd the light-foot Opis to her aid,
Her most belov'd and ever-trusty maid;
Then with a sigh began: "Camilla goes
To meet her death amidst her fatal foes:
The nymphs I lov'd of all my mortal train,
Invested with Diana's arms, in vain.
Nor is my kindness for the virgin new:
'T was born with her; and with her years it grew.
Her father Metabus, when forc'd away
From old Privernum, for tyrannic sway,
Snatch'd up, and sav'd from his prevailing foes,
This tender babe, companion of his woes.
Casmilla was her mother; but he drown'd
One hissing letter in a softer sound,
And call'd Camilla. Thro' the woods he flies;
Wrapp'd in his robe the royal infant lies.
His foes in sight, he mends his weary pace;
With shout and clamors they pursue the chase.
The banks of Amasene at length he gains:

The raging flood his farther flight restrains,
Rais'd o'er the borders with unusual rains.
Prepar'd to plunge into the stream, he fears,
Not for himself, but for the charge he bears.
Anxious, he stops a while, and thinks in haste;
Then, desp'rate in distress, resolves at last.
A knotty lance of well-boil'd oak he bore;
The middle part with cork he cover'd o'er:
He clos'd the child within the hollow space;
With twigs of bending osier bound the case;
Then pois'd the spear, heavy with human weight,
And thus invok'd my favor for the freight:
'Accept, great goddess of the woods,' he said,
'Sent by her sire, this dedicated maid!
Thro' air she flies a suppliant to thy shrine;
And the first weapons that she knows, are thine.'
He said; and with full force the spear he threw:
Above the sounding waves Camilla flew.
Then, press'd by foes, he stemm'd the stormy tide,
And gain'd, by stress of arms, the farther side.
His fasten'd spear he pull'd from out the ground,
And, victor of his vows, his infant nymph unbound;
Nor, after that, in towns which walls inclose,
Would trust his hunted life amidst his foes;
But, rough, in open air he chose to lie;
Earth was his couch, his cov'ring was the sky.
On hills unshorn, or in a desart den,
He shunn'd the dire society of men.
A shepherd's solitary life he led;
His daughter with the milk of mares he fed.
The dugs of bears, and ev'ry salvage beast,
He drew, and thro' her lips the liquor press'd.
The little Amazon could scarcely go:
He loads her with a quiver and a bow;
And, that she might her stagg'ring steps command,
He with a slender jav'lin fills her hand.
Her flowing hair no golden fillet bound;
Nor swept her trailing robe the dusty ground.
Instead of these, a tiger's hide o'erspread
Her back and shoulders, fasten'd to her head.
The flying dart she first attempts to fling,
And round her tender temples toss'd the sling;
Then, as her strength with years increas'd, began
To pierce aloft in air the soaring swan,
And from the clouds to fetch the heron and the crane.
The Tuscan matrons with each other vied,
To bless their rival sons with such a bride;
But she disdains their love, to share with me
The sylvan shades and vow'd virginity.
And, O! I wish, contented with my cares
Of salvage spoils, she had not sought the wars!
Then had she been of my celestial train,
And shunn'd the fate that dooms her to be slain.
But since, opposing Heav'n's decree, she goes
To find her death among forbidden foes,
Haste with these arms, and take thy steepy flight.
Where, with the gods, averse, the Latins fight.
This bow to thee, this quiver I bequeath,
This chosen arrow, to revenge her death:
By whate'er hand Camilla shall be slain,
Or of the Trojan or Italian train,
Let him not pass unpunish'd from the plain.
Then, in a hollow cloud, myself will aid
To bear the breathless body of my maid:
Unspoil'd shall be her arms, and unprofan'd
Her holy limbs with any human hand,
And in a marble tomb laid in her native land."

She said. The faithful nymph descends from high
With rapid flight, and cuts the sounding sky:
Black clouds and stormy winds around her body fly.

By this, the Trojan and the Tuscan horse,
Drawn up in squadrons, with united force,
Approach the walls: the sprightly coursers bound,
Press forward on their bits, and shift their ground.
Shields, arms, and spears flash horribly from far;
And the fields glitter with a waving war.
Oppos'd to these, come on with furious force
Messapus, Coras, and the Latian horse;
These in the body plac'd, on either hand
Sustain'd and clos'd by fair Camilla's band.
Advancing in a line, they couch their spears;
And less and less the middle space appears.
Thick smoke obscures the field; and scarce are seen
The neighing coursers, and the shouting men.
In distance of their darts they stop their course;
Then man to man they rush, and horse to horse.
The face of heav'n their flying jav'lins hide,
And deaths unseen are dealt on either side.
Tyrrhenus, and Aconteus, void of fear,
By mettled coursers borne in full career,
Meet first oppos'd; and, with a mighty shock,
Their horses' heads against each other knock.
Far from his steed is fierce Aconteus cast,
As with an engine's force, or lightning's blast:
He rolls along in blood, and breathes his last.
The Latin squadrons take a sudden fright,
And sling their shields behind, to save their backs in flight
Spurring at speed to their own walls they drew;
Close in the rear the Tuscan troops pursue,
And urge their flight: Asylas leads the chase;
Till, seiz'd, with shame, they wheel about and face,
Receive their foes, and raise a threat'ning cry.
The Tuscans take their turn to fear and fly.
So swelling surges, with a thund'ring roar,
Driv'n on each other's backs, insult the shore,
Bound o'er the rocks, incroach upon the land,
And far upon the beach eject the sand;
Then backward, with a swing, they take their way,
Repuls'd from upper ground, and seek their mother sea;
With equal hurry quit th' invaded shore,
And swallow back the sand and stones they spew'd before.

Twice were the Tuscans masters of the field,
Twice by the Latins, in their turn, repell'd.
Asham'd at length, to the third charge they ran;
Both hosts resolv'd, and mingled man to man.
Now dying groans are heard; the fields are strow'd
With falling bodies, and are drunk with blood.
Arms, horses, men, on heaps together lie:
Confus'd the fight, and more confus'd the cry.
Orsilochus, who durst not press too near
Strong Remulus, at distance drove his spear,
And stuck the steel beneath his horse's ear.
The fiery steed, impatient of the wound,
Curvets, and, springing upward with a bound,
His helpless lord cast backward on the ground.
Catillus pierc'd Iolas first; then drew
His reeking lance, and at Herminius threw,
The mighty champion of the Tuscan crew.
His neck and throat unarm'd, his head was bare,
But shaded with a length of yellow hair:
Secure, he fought, expos'd on ev'ry part,
A spacious mark for swords, and for the flying dart.
Across the shoulders came the feather'd wound;
Transfix'd he fell, and doubled to the ground.
The sands with streaming blood are sanguine dyed,
And death with honor sought on either side.

Resistless thro' the war Camilla rode,
In danger unappall'd, and pleas'd with blood.
One side was bare for her exerted breast;
One shoulder with her painted quiver press'd.
Now from afar her fatal jav'lins play;
Now with her ax's edge she hews her way:
Diana's arms upon her shoulder sound;
And when, too closely press'd, she quits the ground,
From her bent bow she sends a backward wound.
Her maids, in martial pomp, on either side,
Larina, Tulla, fierce Tarpeia, ride:
Italians all; in peace, their queen's delight;
In war, the bold companions of the fight.
So march'd the Tracian Amazons of old,
When Thermodon with bloody billows roll'd:
Such troops as these in shining arms were seen,
When Theseus met in fight their maiden queen:
Such to the field Penthisilea led,
From the fierce virgin when the Grecians fled;
With such, return'd triumphant from the war,
Her maids with cries attend the lofty car;
They clash with manly force their moony shields;
With female shouts resound the Phrygian fields.

Who foremost, and who last, heroic maid,
On the cold earth were by thy courage laid?
Thy spear, of mountain ash, Eumenius first,
With fury driv'n, from side to side transpierc'd:
A purple stream came spouting from the wound;
Bath'd in his blood he lies, and bites the ground.
Liris and Pegasus at once she slew:
The former, as the slacken'd reins he drew
Of his faint steed; the latter, as he stretch'd
His arm to prop his friend, the jav'lin reach'd.
By the same weapon, sent from the same hand,
Both fall together, and both spurn the sand.
Amastrus next is added to the slain:
The rest in rout she follows o'er the plain:
Tereus, Harpalycus, Demophoon,
And Chromis, at full speed her fury shun.
Of all her deadly darts, not one she lost;
Each was attended with a Trojan ghost.
Young Ornithus bestrode a hunter steed,
Swift for the chase, and of Apulian breed.
Him from afar she spied, in arms unknown:
O'er his broad back an ox's hide was thrown;
His helm a wolf, whose gaping jaws were spread
A cov'ring for his cheeks, and grinn'd around his head,
He clench'd within his hand an iron prong,
And tower'd above the rest, conspicuous in the throng.
Him soon she singled from the flying train,
And slew with ease; then thus insults the slain:
"Vain hunter, didst thou think thro' woods to chase
The savage herd, a vile and trembling race?
Here cease thy vaunts, and own my victory:
A woman warrior was too strong for thee.
Yet, if the ghosts demand the conqu'ror's name,
Confessing great Camilla, save thy shame."
Then Butes and Orsilochus she slew,
The bulkiest bodies of the Trojan crew;
But Butes breast to breast: the spear descends
Above the gorget, where his helmet ends,
And o'er the shield which his left side defends.
Orsilochus and she their courses ply:
He seems to follow, and she seems to fly;
But in a narrower ring she makes the race;
And then he flies, and she pursues the chase.
Gath'ring at length on her deluded foe,
She swings her ax, and rises to the blow
Full on the helm behind, with such a sway
The weapon falls, the riven steel gives way:
He groans, he roars, he sues in vain for grace;
Brains, mingled with his blood, besmear his face.

Astonish'd Aunus just arrives by chance,
To see his fall; nor farther dares advance;
But, fixing on the horrid maid his eye,
He stares, and shakes, and finds it vain to fly;
Yet, like a true Ligurian, born to cheat,
(At least while fortune favor'd his deceit,)
Cries out aloud: "What courage have you shown,
Who trust your courser's strength, and not your own?
Forego the vantage of your horse, alight,
And then on equal terms begin the fight:
It shall be seen, weak woman, what you can,
When, foot to foot, you combat with a man,"
He said. She glows with anger and disdain,
Dismounts with speed to dare him on the plain,
And leaves her horse at large among her train;
With her drawn sword defies him to the field,
And, marching, lifts aloft her maiden shield.
The youth, who thought his cunning did succeed,
Reins round his horse, and urges all his speed;
Adds the remembrance of the spur, and hides
The goring rowels in his bleeding sides.
"Vain fool, and coward!" cries the lofty maid,
"Caught in the train which thou thyself hast laid!
On others practice thy Ligurian arts;
Thin stratagems and tricks of little hearts
Are lost on me: nor shalt thou safe retire,
With vaunting lies, to thy fallacious sire."
At this, so fast her flying feet she sped,
That soon she strain'd beyond his horse's head:
Then turning short, at once she seiz'd the rein,
And laid the boaster grov'ling on the plain.
Not with more ease the falcon, from above,
Trusses in middle air the trembling dove,
Then plumes the prey, in her strong pounces bound:
The feathers, foul with blood, come tumbling to the ground.

Now mighty Jove, from his superior height,
With his broad eye surveys th' unequal fight.
He fires the breast of Tarchon with disdain,
And sends him to redeem th' abandon'd plain.
Betwixt the broken ranks the Tuscan rides,
And these encourages, and those he chides;
Recalls each leader, by his name, from flight;
Renews their ardor, and restores the fight.
"What panic fear has seiz'd your souls? O shame,
O brand perpetual of th' Etrurian name!
Cowards incurable, a woman's hand
Drives, breaks, and scatters your ignoble band!
Now cast away the sword, and quit the shield!
What use of weapons which you dare not wield?
Not thus you fly your female foes by night,
Nor shun the feast, when the full bowls invite;
When to fat off'rings the glad augur calls,
And the shrill hornpipe sounds to bacchanals.
These are your studied cares, your lewd delight:
Swift to debauch, but slow to manly fight."
Thus having said, he spurs amid the foes,
Not managing the life he meant to lose.
The first he found he seiz'd with headlong haste,
In his strong gripe, and clasp'd around the waist;
'T was Venulus, whom from his horse he tore,
And, laid athwart his own, in triumph bore.
Loud shouts ensue; the Latins turn their eyes,
And view th' unusual sight with vast surprise.
The fiery Tarchon, flying o'er the plains,
Press'd in his arms the pond'rous prey sustains;
Then, with his shorten'd spear, explores around
His jointed arms, to fix a deadly wound.
Nor less the captive struggles for his life:
He writhes his body to prolong the strife,
And, fencing for his naked throat, exerts
His utmost vigor, and the point averts.
So stoops the yellow eagle from on high,
And bears a speckled serpent thro' the sky,
Fast'ning his crooked talons on the prey:
The pris'ner hisses thro' the liquid way;
Resists the royal hawk; and, tho' oppress'd,
She fights in volumes, and erects her crest:
Turn'd to her foe, she stiffens ev'ry scale,
And shoots her forky tongue, and whisks her threat'ning tail.
Against the victor, all defense is weak:
Th' imperial bird still plies her with his beak;
He tears her bowels, and her breast he gores;
Then claps his pinions, and securely soars.
Thus, thro' the midst of circling enemies,
Strong Tarchon snatch'd and bore away his prize.
The Tyrrhene troops, that shrunk before, now press
The Latins, and presume the like success.

Then Aruns, doom'd to death, his arts assay'd,
To murther, unespied, the Volscian maid:
This way and that his winding course he bends,
And, whereso'er she turns, her steps attends.
When she retires victorious from the chase,
He wheels about with care, and shifts his place;
When, rushing on, she seeks her foes flight,
He keeps aloof, but keeps her still in sight:
He threats, and trembles, trying ev'ry way,
Unseen to kill, and safely to betray.
Chloreus, the priest of Cybele, from far,
Glitt'ring in Phrygian arms amidst the war,
Was by the virgin view'd. The steed he press'd
Was proud with trappings, and his brawny chest
With scales of gilded brass was cover'd o'er;
A robe of Tyrian dye the rider wore.
With deadly wounds he gall'd the distant foe;
Gnossian his shafts, and Lycian was his bow:
A golden helm his front and head surrounds
A gilded quiver from his shoulder sounds.
Gold, weav'd with linen, on his thighs he wore,
With flowers of needlework distinguish'd o'er,
With golden buckles bound, and gather'd up before.
Him the fierce maid beheld with ardent eyes,
Fond and ambitious of so rich a prize,
Or that the temple might his trophies hold,
Or else to shine herself in Trojan gold.
Blind in her haste, she chases him alone.
And seeks his life, regardless of her own.

This lucky moment the sly traitor chose:
Then, starting from his ambush, up he rose,
And threw, but first to Heav'n address'd his vows:
"O patron of Socrates' high abodes,
Phoebus, the ruling pow'r among the gods,
Whom first we serve, whole woods of unctuous pine
Are fell'd for thee, and to thy glory shine;
By thee protected with our naked soles,
Thro' flames unsing'd we march, and tread the kindled coals
Give me, propitious pow'r, to wash away
The stains of this dishonorable day:
Nor spoils, nor triumph, from the fact I claim,
But with my future actions trust my fame.
Let me, by stealth, this female plague o'ercome,
And from the field return inglorious home."
Apollo heard, and, granting half his pray'r,
Shuffled in winds the rest, and toss'd in empty air.
He gives the death desir'd; his safe return
By southern tempests to the seas is borne.

Now, when the jav'lin whizz'd along the skies,
Both armies on Camilla turn'd their eyes,
Directed by the sound. Of either host,
Th' unhappy virgin, tho' concern'd the most,
Was only deaf; so greedy was she bent
On golden spoils, and on her prey intent;
Till in her pap the winged weapon stood
Infix'd, and deeply drunk the purple blood.
Her sad attendants hasten to sustain
Their dying lady, drooping on the plain.
Far from their sight the trembling Aruns flies,
With beating heart, and fear confus'd with joys;
Nor dares he farther to pursue his blow,
Or ev'n to bear the sight of his expiring foe.
As, when the wolf has torn a bullock's hide
At unawares, or ranch'd a shepherd's side,
Conscious of his audacious deed, he flies,
And claps his quiv'ring tail between his thighs:
So, speeding once, the wretch no more attends,
But, spurring forward, herds among his friends.

She wrench'd the jav'lin with her dying hands,
But wedg'd within her breast the weapon stands;
The wood she draws, the steely point remains;
She staggers in her seat with agonizing pains:
(A gath'ring mist o'erclouds her cheerful eyes,
And from her cheeks the rosy color flies:)
Then turns to her, whom of her female train
She trusted most, and thus she speaks with pain:
"Acca, 't is past! he swims before my sight,
Inexorable Death; and claims his right.
Bear my last words to Turnus; fly with speed,
And bid him timely to my charge succeed,
Repel the Trojans, and the town relieve:
Farewell! and in this kiss my parting breath receive."
She said, and, sliding, sunk upon the plain:
Dying, her open'd hand forsakes the rein;
Short, and more short, she pants; by slow degrees
Her mind the passage from her body frees.
She drops her sword; she nods her plumy crest,
Her drooping head declining on her breast:
In the last sigh her struggling soul expires,
And, murm'ring with disdain, to Stygian sounds retires.

A shout, that struck the golden stars, ensued;
Despair and rage the languish'd fight renew'd.
The Trojan troops and Tuscans, in a line,
Advance to charge; the mix'd Arcadians join.

But Cynthia's maid, high seated, from afar
Surveys the field, and fortune of the war,
Unmov'd a while, till, prostrate on the plain,
Welt'ring in blood, she sees Camilla slain,
And, round her corpse, of friends and foes a fighting train.
Then, from the bottom of her breast, she drew
A mournful sigh, and these sad words ensue:
"Too dear a fine, ah much lamented maid,
For warring with the Trojans, thou hast paid!
Nor aught avail'd, in this unhappy strife,
Diana's sacred arms, to save thy life.
Yet unreveng'd thy goddess will not leave
Her vot'ry's death, nor; with vain sorrow grieve.
Branded the wretch, and be his name abhorr'd;
But after ages shall thy praise record.
Th' inglorious coward soon shall press the plain:
Thus vows thy queen, and thus the Fates ordain."

High o'er the field there stood a hilly mound,
Sacred the place, and spread with oaks around,
Where, in a marble tomb, Dercennus lay,
A king that once in Latium bore the sway.
The beauteous Opis thither bent her flight,
To mark the traitor Aruns from the height.
Him in refulgent arms she soon espied,
Swoln with success; and loudly thus she cried:
"Thy backward steps, vain boaster, are too late;
Turn like a man, at length, and meet thy fate.
Charg'd with my message, to Camilla go,
And say I sent thee to the shades below,
An honor undeserv'd from Cynthia's bow."

She said, and from her quiver chose with speed
The winged shaft, predestin'd for the deed;
Then to the stubborn yew her strength applied,
Till the far distant horns approach'd on either side.
The bowstring touch'd her breast, so strong she drew;
Whizzing in air the fatal arrow flew.
At once the twanging bow and sounding dart
The traitor heard, and felt the point within his heart.
Him, beating with his heels in pangs of death,
His flying friends to foreign fields bequeath.
The conqu'ring damsel, with expanded wings,
The welcome message to her mistress brings.

Their leader lost, the Volscians quit the field,
And, unsustain'd, the chiefs of Turnus yield.
The frighted soldiers, when their captains fly,
More on their speed than on their strength rely.
Confus'd in flight, they bear each other down,
And spur their horses headlong to the town.
Driv'n by their foes, and to their fears resign'd,
Not once they turn, but take their wounds behind.
These drop the shield, and those the lance forego,
Or on their shoulders bear the slacken'd bow.
The hoofs of horses, with a rattling sound,
Beat short and thick, and shake the rotten ground.
Black clouds of dust come rolling in the sky,
And o'er the darken'd walls and rampires fly.
The trembling matrons, from their lofty stands,
Rend heav'n with female shrieks, and wring their hands.
All pressing on, pursuers and pursued,
Are crush'd in crowds, a mingled multitude.
Some happy few escape: the throng too late
Rush on for entrance, till they choke the gate.
Ev'n in the sight of home, the wretched sire
Looks on, and sees his helpless son expire.
Then, in a fright, the folding gates they close,
But leave their friends excluded with their foes.
The vanquish'd cry; the victors loudly shout;
'T is terror all within, and slaughter all without.
Blind in their fear, they bounce against the wall,
Or, to the moats pursued, precipitate their fall.

The Latian virgins, valiant with despair,
Arm'd on the tow'rs, the common danger share:
So much of zeal their country's cause inspir'd;
So much Camilla's great example fir'd.
Poles, sharpen'd in the flames, from high they throw,
With imitated darts, to gall the foe.
Their lives for godlike freedom they bequeath,
And crowd each other to be first in death.
Meantime to Turnus, ambush'd in the shade,
With heavy tidings came th' unhappy maid:
"The Volscians overthrown, Camilla kill'd;
The foes, entirely masters of the field,
Like a resistless flood, come rolling on:
The cry goes off the plain, and thickens to the town."

Inflam'd with rage, (for so the Furies fire
The Daunian's breast, and so the Fates require,)
He leaves the hilly pass, the woods in vain
Possess'd, and downward issues on the plain.
Scarce was he gone, when to the straits, now freed
From secret foes, the Trojan troops succeed.
Thro' the black forest and the ferny brake,
Unknowingly secure, their way they take;
From the rough mountains to the plain descend,
And there, in order drawn, their line extend.
Both armies now in open fields are seen;
Nor far the distance of the space between.
Both to the city bend. Aeneas sees,
Thro' smoking fields, his hast'ning enemies;
And Turnus views the Trojans in array,
And hears th' approaching horses proudly neigh.
Soon had their hosts in bloody battle join'd;
But westward to the sea the sun declin'd.
Intrench'd before the town both armies lie,
While Night with sable wings involves the sky.





When Turnus saw the Latins leave the field,
Their armies broken, and their courage quell'd,
Himself become the mark of public spite,
His honor question'd for the promis'd fight;
The more he was with vulgar hate oppress'd,
The more his fury boil'd within his breast:
He rous'd his vigor for the last debate,
And rais'd his haughty soul to meet his fate.

As, when the swains the Libyan lion chase,
He makes a sour retreat, nor mends his pace;
But, if the pointed jav'lin pierce his side,
The lordly beast returns with double pride:
He wrenches out the steel, he roars for pain;
His sides he lashes, and erects his mane:
So Turnus fares; his eyeballs flash with fire,
Thro' his wide nostrils clouds of smoke expire.

Trembling with rage, around the court he ran,
At length approach'd the king, and thus began:
"No more excuses or delays: I stand
In arms prepar'd to combat, hand to hand,
This base deserter of his native land.
The Trojan, by his word, is bound to take
The same conditions which himself did make.
Renew the truce; the solemn rites prepare,
And to my single virtue trust the war.
The Latians unconcern'd shall see the fight;
This arm unaided shall assert your right:
Then, if my prostrate body press the plain,
To him the crown and beauteous bride remain."

To whom the king sedately thus replied:
"Brave youth, the more your valor has been tried,
The more becomes it us, with due respect,
To weigh the chance of war, which you neglect.
You want not wealth, or a successive throne,
Or cities which your arms have made your own:
My towns and treasures are at your command,
And stor'd with blooming beauties is my land;
Laurentum more than one Lavinia sees,
Unmarried, fair, of noble families.
Now let me speak, and you with patience hear,
Things which perhaps may grate a lover's ear,
But sound advice, proceeding from a heart
Sincerely yours, and free from fraudful art.
The gods, by signs, have manifestly shown,
No prince Italian born should heir my throne:
Oft have our augurs, in prediction skill'd,
And oft our priests, foreign son reveal'd.
Yet, won by worth that cannot be withstood,
Brib'd by my kindness to my kindred blood,
Urg'd by my wife, who would not be denied,
I promis'd my Lavinia for your bride:
Her from her plighted lord by force I took;
All ties of treaties, and of honor, broke:
On your account I wag'd an impious war-
With what success, 't is needless to declare;
I and my subjects feel, and you have had your share.
Twice vanquish'd while in bloody fields we strive,
Scarce in our walls we keep our hopes alive:
The rolling flood runs warm with human gore;
The bones of Latians blanch the neighb'ring shore.
Why put I not an end to this debate,
Still unresolv'd, and still a slave to fate?
If Turnus' death a lasting peace can give,
Why should I not procure it whilst you live?
Should I to doubtful arms your youth betray,
What would my kinsmen the Rutulians say?
And, should you fall in fight, (which Heav'n defend!)
How curse the cause which hasten'd to his end
The daughter's lover and the father's friend?
Weigh in your mind the various chance of war;
Pity your parent's age, and ease his care."

Such balmy words he pour'd, but all in vain:
The proffer'd med'cine but provok'd the pain.
The wrathful youth, disdaining the relief,
With intermitting sobs thus vents his grief:
"The care, O best of fathers, which you take
For my concerns, at my desire forsake.
Permit me not to languish out my days,
But make the best exchange of life for praise.
This arm, this lance, can well dispute the prize;
And the blood follows, where the weapon flies.
His goddess mother is not near, to shroud
The flying coward with an empty cloud."

But now the queen, who fear'd for Turnus' life,
And loath'd the hard conditions of the strife,
Held him by force; and, dying in his death,
In these sad accents gave her sorrow breath:
"O Turnus, I adjure thee by these tears,
And whate'er price Amata's honor bears
Within thy breast, since thou art all my hope,
My sickly mind's repose, my sinking age's prop;
Since on the safety of thy life alone
Depends Latinus, and the Latian throne:
Refuse me not this one, this only pray'r,
To waive the combat, and pursue the war.
Whatever chance attends this fatal strife,
Think it includes, in thine, Amata's life.
I cannot live a slave, or see my throne
Usurp'd by strangers or a Trojan son."

At this, a flood of tears Lavinia shed;
A crimson blush her beauteous face o'erspread,
Varying her cheeks by turns with white and red.
The driving colors, never at a stay,
Run here and there, and flush, and fade away.
Delightful change! Thus Indian iv'ry shows,
Which with the bord'ring paint of purple glows;
Or lilies damask'd by the neighb'ring rose.

The lover gaz'd, and, burning with desire,
The more he look'd, the more he fed the fire:
Revenge, and jealous rage, and secret spite,
Roll in his breast, and rouse him to the fight.
Then fixing on the queen his ardent eyes,
Firm to his first intent, he thus replies:
"O mother, do not by your tears prepare
Such boding omens, and prejudge the war.
Resolv'd on fight, I am no longer free
To shun my death, if Heav'n my death decree."
Then turning to the herald, thus pursues:
"Go, greet the Trojan with ungrateful news;
Denounce from me, that, when to-morrow's light
Shall gild the heav'ns, he need not urge the fight;
The Trojan and Rutulian troops no more
Shall dye, with mutual blood, the Latian shore:
Our single swords the quarrel shall decide,
And to the victor be the beauteous bride."

He said, and striding on, with speedy pace,
He sought his coursers of the Thracian race.
At his approach they toss their heads on high,
And, proudly neighing, promise victory.
The sires of these Orythia sent from far,
To grace Pilumnus, when he went to war.
The drifts of Thracian snows were scarce so white,
Nor northern winds in fleetness match'd their flight.
Officious grooms stand ready by his side;
And some with combs their flowing manes divide,
And others stroke their chests and gently soothe their pride.

He sheath'd his limbs in arms; a temper'd mass
Of golden metal those, and mountain brass.
Then to his head his glitt'ring helm he tied,
And girt his faithful fauchion to his side.
In his Aetnaean forge, the God of Fire
That fauchion labor'd for the hero's sire;
Immortal keenness on the blade bestow'd,
And plung'd it hissing in the Stygian flood.
Propp'd on a pillar, which the ceiling bore,
Was plac'd the lance Auruncan Actor wore;
Which with such force he brandish'd in his hand,
The tough ash trembled like an osier wand:
Then cried: "O pond'rous spoil of Actor slain,
And never yet by Turnus toss'd in vain,
Fail not this day thy wonted force; but go,
Sent by this hand, to pierce the Trojan foe!
Give me to tear his corslet from his breast,
And from that eunuch head to rend the crest;
Dragg'd in the dust, his frizzled hair to soil,
Hot from the vexing ir'n, and smear'd with fragrant oil!"

Thus while he raves, from his wide nostrils flies
A fiery steam, and sparkles from his eyes.
So fares the bull in his lov'd female's sight:
Proudly he bellows, and preludes the fight;
He tries his goring horns against a tree,
And meditates his absent enemy;
He pushes at the winds; he digs the strand
With his black hoofs, and spurns the yellow sand.

Nor less the Trojan, in his Lemnian arms,
To future fight his manly courage warms:
He whets his fury, and with joy prepares
To terminate at once the ling'ring wars;
To cheer his chiefs and tender son, relates
What Heav'n had promis'd, and expounds the fates.
Then to the Latian king he sends, to cease
The rage of arms, and ratify the peace.

The morn ensuing, from the mountain's height,
Had scarcely spread the skies with rosy light;
Th' ethereal coursers, bounding from the sea,
From out their flaming nostrils breath'd the day;
When now the Trojan and Rutulian guard,
In friendly labor join'd, the list prepar'd.
Beneath the walls they measure out the space;
Then sacred altars rear, on sods of grass,
Where, with religious their common gods they place.
In purest white the priests their heads attire;
And living waters bear, and holy fire;
And, o'er their linen hoods and shaded hair,
Long twisted wreaths of sacred veryain wear.

In order issuing from the town appears
The Latin legion, arm'd with pointed spears;
And from the fields, advancing on a line,
The Trojan and the Tuscan forces join:
Their various arms afford a pleasing sight;
A peaceful train they seem, in peace prepar'd for fight.
Betwixt the ranks the proud commanders ride,
Glitt'ring with gold, and vests in purple dyed;
Here Mnestheus, author of the Memmian line,
And there Messapus, born of seed divine.
The sign is giv'n; and, round the listed space,
Each man in order fills his proper place.
Reclining on their ample shields, they stand,
And fix their pointed lances in the sand.
Now, studious of the sight, a num'rous throng
Of either sex promiscuous, old and young,
Swarm the town: by those who rest behind,
The gates and walls and houses' tops are lin'd.
Meantime the Queen of Heav'n beheld the sight,
With eyes unpleas'd, from Mount Albano's height
(Since call'd Albano by succeeding fame,
But then an empty hill, without a name).
She thence survey'd the field, the Trojan pow'rs,
The Latian squadrons, and Laurentine tow'rs.
Then thus the goddess of the skies bespoke,
With sighs and tears, the goddess of the lake,
King Turnus' sister, once a lovely maid,
Ere to the lust of lawless Jove betray'd:
Compress'd by force, but, by the grateful god,
Now made the Nais of the neighb'ring flood.
"O nymph, the pride of living lakes," said she,
"O most renown'd, and most belov'd by me,
Long hast thou known, nor need I to record,
The wanton sallies of my wand'ring lord.
Of ev'ry Latian fair whom Jove misled
To mount by stealth my violated bed,
To thee alone I grudg'd not his embrace,
But gave a part of heav'n, and an unenvied place.
Now learn from me thy near approaching grief,
Nor think my wishes want to thy relief.
While fortune favor'd, nor Heav'n's King denied
To lend my succor to the Latian side,
I sav'd thy brother, and the sinking state:
But now he struggles with unequal fate,
And goes, with gods averse, o'ermatch'd in might,
To meet inevitable death in fight;
Nor must I break the truce, nor can sustain the sight.
Thou, if thou dar'st thy present aid supply;
It well becomes a sister's care to try."

At this the lovely nymph, with grief oppress'd,
Thrice tore her hair, and beat her comely breast.
To whom Saturnia thus: "Thy tears are late:
Haste, snatch him, if he can be snatch'd from fate:
New tumults kindle; violate the truce:
Who knows what changeful fortune may produce?
'T is not a crime t' attempt what I decree;
Or, if it were, discharge the crime on me."
She said, and, sailing on the winged wind,
Left the sad nymph suspended in her mind.

And now pomp the peaceful kings appear:
Four steeds the chariot of Latinus bear;
Twelve golden beams around his temples play,
To mark his lineage from the God of Day.
Two snowy coursers Turnus' chariot yoke,
And in his hand two massy spears he shook:
Then issued from the camp, in arms divine,
Aeneas, author of the Roman line;
And by his side Ascanius took his place,
The second hope of Rome's immortal race.
Adorn'd in white, a rev'rend priest appears,
And off'rings to the flaming altars bears;
A porket, and a lamb that never suffer'd shears.
Then to the rising sun he turns his eyes,
And strews the beasts, design'd for sacrifice,
With salt and meal: with like officious care
He marks their foreheads, and he clips their hair.
Betwixt their horns the purple wine he sheds;
With the same gen'rous juice the flame he feeds.

Aeneas then unsheath'd his shining sword,
And thus with pious pray'rs the gods ador'd:
"All-seeing sun, and thou, Ausonian soil,
For which I have sustain'd so long a toil,
Thou, King of Heav'n, and thou, the Queen of Air,
Propitious now, and reconcil'd by pray'r;
Thou, God of War, whose unresisted sway
The labors and events of arms obey;
Ye living fountains, and ye running floods,
All pow'rs of ocean, all ethereal gods,
Hear, and bear record: if I fall in field,
Or, recreant in the fight, to Turnus yield,
My Trojans shall encrease Evander's town;
Ascanius shall renounce th' Ausonian crown:
All claims, all questions of debate, shall cease;
Nor he, nor they, with force infringe the peace.
But, if my juster arms prevail in fight,
(As sure they shall, if I divine aright,)
My Trojans shall not o'er th' Italians reign:
Both equal, both unconquer'd shall remain,
Join'd in their laws, their lands, and their abodes;
I ask but altars for my weary gods.
The care of those religious rites be mine;
The crown to King Latinus I resign:
His be the sov'reign sway. Nor will I share
His pow'r in peace, or his command in war.
For me, my friends another town shall frame,
And bless the rising tow'rs with fair Lavinia's name."

Thus he. Then, with erected eyes and hands,
The Latian king before his altar stands.
"By the same heav'n," said he, "and earth, and main,
And all the pow'rs that all the three contain;
By hell below, and by that upper god
Whose thunder signs the peace, who seals it with his nod;
So let Latona's double offspring hear,
And double-fronted Janus, what I swear:
I touch the sacred altars, touch the flames,
And all those pow'rs attest, and all their names;
Whatever chance befall on either side,
No term of time this union shall divide:
No force, no fortune, shall my vows unbind,
Or shake the steadfast tenor of my mind;
Not tho' the circling seas should break their bound,
O'erflow the shores, or sap the solid ground;
Not tho' the lamps of heav'n their spheres forsake,
Hurl'd down, and hissing in the nether lake:
Ev'n as this royal scepter" (for he bore
A scepter in his hand) "shall never more
Shoot out in branches, or renew the birth:
An orphan now, cut from the mother earth
By the keen ax, dishonor'd of its hair,
And cas'd in brass, for Latian kings to bear."

When thus in public view the peace was tied
With solemn vows, and sworn on either side,
All dues perform'd which holy rites require;
The victim beasts are slain before the fire,
The trembling entrails from their bodies torn,
And to the fatten'd flames in chargers borne.

Already the Rutulians deem their man
O'ermatch'd in arms, before the fight began.
First rising fears are whisper'd thro' the crowd;
Then, gath'ring sound, they murmur more aloud.
Now, side to side, they measure with their eyes
The champions' bulk, their sinews, and their size:
The nearer they approach, the more is known
Th' apparent disadvantage of their own.
Turnus himself appears in public sight
Conscious of fate, desponding of the fight.
Slowly he moves, and at his altar stands
With eyes dejected, and with trembling hands;
And, while he mutters undistinguish'd pray'rs,
A livid deadness in his cheeks appears.

With anxious pleasure when Juturna view'd
Th' increasing fright of the mad multitude,
When their short sighs and thick'ning sobs she heard,
And found their ready minds for change prepar'd;
Dissembling her immortal form, she took
Camertus' mien, his habit, and his look;
A chief of ancient blood; in arms well known
Was his great sire, and he his greater son.
His shape assum'd, amid the ranks she ran,
And humoring their first motions, thus began:
"For shame, Rutulians, can you bear the sight
Of one expos'd for all, in single fight?
Can we, before the face of heav'n, confess
Our courage colder, or our numbers less?
View all the Trojan host, th' Arcadian band,
And Tuscan army; count 'em as they stand:
Undaunted to the battle if we go,
Scarce ev'ry second man will share a foe.
Turnus, 't is true, in this unequal strife,
Shall lose, with honor, his devoted life,
Or change it rather for immortal fame,
Succeeding to the gods, from whence he came:
But you, a servile and inglorious band,
For foreign lords shall sow your native land,
Those fruitful fields your fighting fathers gain'd,
Which have so long their lazy sons sustain'd."
With words like these, she carried her design:
A rising murmur runs along the line.
Then ev'n the city troops, and Latians, tir'd
With tedious war, seem with new souls inspir'd:
Their champion's fate with pity they lament,
And of the league, so lately sworn, repent.

Nor fails the goddess to foment the rage
With lying wonders, and a false presage;
But adds a sign, which, present to their eyes,
Inspires new courage, and a glad surprise.
For, sudden, in the fiery tracts above,
Appears in pomp th' imperial bird of Jove:
A plump of fowl he spies, that swim the lakes,
And o'er their heads his sounding pinions shakes;
Then, stooping on the fairest of the train,
In his strong talons truss'd a silver swan.
Th' Italians wonder at th' unusual sight;
But, while he lags, and labors in his flight,
Behold, the dastard fowl return anew,
And with united force the foe pursue:
Clam'rous around the royal hawk they fly,
And, thick'ning in a cloud, o'ershade the sky.
They cuff, they scratch, they cross his airy course;
Nor can th' incumber'd bird sustain their force;
But vex'd, not vanquish'd, drops the pond'rous prey,
And, lighten'd of his burthen, wings his way.

Th' Ausonian bands with shouts salute the sight,
Eager of action, and demand the fight.
Then King Tolumnius, vers'd in augurs' arts,
Cries out, and thus his boasted skill imparts:
"At length 't is granted, what I long desir'd!
This, this is what my frequent vows requir'd.
Ye gods, I take your omen, and obey.
Advance, my friends, and charge! I lead the way.
These are the foreign foes, whose impious band,
Like that rapacious bird, infest our land:
But soon, like him, they shall be forc'd to sea
By strength united, and forego the prey.
Your timely succor to your country bring,
Haste to the rescue, and redeem your king."

He said; and, pressing onward thro' the crew,
Pois'd in his lifted arm, his lance he threw.
The winged weapon, whistling in the wind,
Came driving on, nor miss'd the mark design'd.
At once the cornel rattled in the skies;
At once tumultuous shouts and clamors rise.
Nine brothers in a goodly band there stood,
Born of Arcadian mix'd with Tuscan blood,
Gylippus' sons: the fatal jav'lin flew,
Aim'd at the midmost of the friendly crew.
A passage thro' the jointed arms it found,
Just where the belt was to the body bound,
And struck the gentle youth extended on the ground.
Then, fir'd with pious rage, the gen'rous train
Run madly forward to revenge the slain.
And some with eager haste their jav'lins throw;
And some with sword in hand assault the foe.

The wish'd insult the Latine troops embrace,
And meet their ardor in the middle space.
The Trojans, Tuscans, and Arcadian line,
With equal courage obviate their design.
Peace leaves the violated fields, and hate
Both armies urges to their mutual fate.
With impious haste their altars are o'erturn'd,
The sacrifice half-broil'd, and half-unburn'd.
Thick storms of steel from either army fly,
And clouds of clashing darts obscure the sky;
Brands from the fire are missive weapons made,
With chargers, bowls, and all the priestly trade.
Latinus, frighted, hastens from the fray,
And bears his unregarded gods away.
These on their horses vault; those yoke the car;
The rest, with swords on high, run headlong to the war.

Messapus, eager to confound the peace,
Spurr'd his hot courser thro' the fighting prease,
At King Aulestes, by his purple known
A Tuscan prince, and by his regal crown;
And, with a shock encount'ring, bore him down.
Backward he fell; and, as his fate design'd,
The ruins of an altar were behind:
There, pitching on his shoulders and his head,
Amid the scatt'ring fires he lay supinely spread.
The beamy spear, descending from above,
His cuirass pierc'd, and thro' his body drove.
Then, with a scornful smile, the victor cries:
"The gods have found a fitter sacrifice."
Greedy of spoils, th' Italians strip the dead
Of his rich armor, and uncrown his head.

Priest Corynaeus, arm'd his better hand,
From his own altar, with a blazing brand;
And, as Ebusus with a thund'ring pace
Advanc'd to battle, dash'd it on his face:
His bristly beard shines out with sudden fires;
The crackling crop a noisome scent expires.
Following the blow, he seiz'd his curling crown
With his left hand; his other cast him down.
The prostrate body with his knees he press'd,
And plung'd his holy poniard in his breast.

While Podalirius, with his sword, pursued
The shepherd Alsus thro' the flying crowd,
Swiftly he turns, and aims a deadly blow
Full on the front of his unwary foe.
The broad ax enters with a crashing sound,
And cleaves the chin with one continued wound;
Warm blood, and mingled brains, besmear his arms around
An iron sleep his stupid eyes oppress'd,
And seal'd their heavy lids in endless rest.

But good Aeneas rush'd amid the bands;
Bare was his head, and naked were his hands,
In sign of truce: then thus he cries aloud:
"What sudden rage, what new desire of blood,
Inflames your alter'd minds? O Trojans, cease
From impious arms, nor violate the peace!
By human sanctions, and by laws divine,
The terms are all agreed; the war is mine.
Dismiss your fears, and let the fight ensue;
This hand alone shall right the gods and you:
Our injur'd altars, and their broken vow,
To this avenging sword the faithless Turnus owe."

Thus while he spoke, unmindful of defense,
A winged arrow struck the pious prince.
But, whether from some human hand it came,
Or hostile god, is left unknown by fame:
No human hand or hostile god was found,
To boast the triumph of so base a wound.

When Turnus saw the Trojan quit the plain,
His chiefs dismay'd, his troops a fainting train,
Th' unhop'd event his heighten'd soul inspires:
At once his arms and coursers he requires;
Then, with a leap, his lofty chariot gains,
And with a ready hand assumes the reins.
He drives impetuous, and, where'er he goes,
He leaves behind a lane of slaughter'd foes.
These his lance reaches; over those he rolls
His rapid car, and crushes out their souls:
In vain the vanquish'd fly; the victor sends
The dead men's weapons at their living friends.
Thus, on the banks of Hebrus' freezing flood,
The God of Battles, in his angry mood,
Clashing his sword against his brazen shield,
Let loose the reins, and scours along the field:
Before the wind his fiery coursers fly;
Groans the sad earth, resounds the rattling sky.
Wrath, Terror, Treason, Tumult, and Despair
(Dire faces, and deform'd) surround the car;
Friends of the god, and followers of the war.
With fury not unlike, nor less disdain,
Exulting Turnus flies along the plain:
His smoking horses, at their utmost speed,
He lashes on, and urges o'er the dead.
Their fetlocks run with blood; and, when they bound,
The gore and gath'ring dust are dash'd around.
Thamyris and Pholus, masters of the war,
He kill'd at hand, but Sthenelus afar:
From far the sons of Imbracus he slew,
Glaucus and Lades, of the Lycian crew;
Both taught to fight on foot, in battle join'd,
Or mount the courser that outstrips the wind.

Meantime Eumedes, vaunting in the field,
New fir'd the Trojans, and their foes repell'd.
This son of Dolon bore his grandsire's name,
But emulated more his father's fame;
His guileful father, sent a nightly spy,
The Grecian camp and order to descry:
Hard enterprise! and well he might require
Achilles' car and horses, for his hire:
But, met upon the scout, th' Aetolian prince
In death bestow'd a juster recompense.
Fierce Turnus view'd the Trojan from afar,
And launch'd his jav'lin from his lofty car;
Then lightly leaping down, pursued the blow,
And, pressing with his foot his prostrate foe,
Wrench'd from his feeble hold the shining sword,
And plung'd it in the bosom of its lord.
"Possess," said he, "the fruit of all thy pains,
And measure, at thy length, our Latian plains.
Thus are my foes rewarded by my hand;
Thus may they build their town, and thus enjoy the land!"

Then Dares, Butes, Sybaris he slew,
Whom o'er his neck his flound'ring courser threw.
As when loud Boreas, with his blust'ring train,
Stoops from above, incumbent on the main;
Where'er he flies, he drives the rack before,
And rolls the billows on th' Aegaean shore:
So, where resistless Turnus takes his course,
The scatter'd squadrons bend before his force;
His crest of horses' hair is blown behind
By adverse air, and rustles in the wind.

This haughty Phegeus saw with high disdain,
And, as the chariot roll'd along the plain,
Light from the ground he leapt, and seiz'd the rein.
Thus hung in air, he still retain'd his hold,
The coursers frighted, and their course controll'd.
The lance of Turnus reach'd him as he hung,
And pierc'd his plated arms, but pass'd along,
And only raz'd the skin. He turn'd, and held
Against his threat'ning foe his ample shield;
Then call'd for aid: but, while he cried in vain,
The chariot bore him backward on the plain.
He lies revers'd; the victor king descends,
And strikes so justly where his helmet ends,
He lops the head. The Latian fields are drunk
With streams that issue from the bleeding trunk.

While he triumphs, and while the Trojans yield,
The wounded prince is forc'd to leave the field:
Strong Mnestheus, and Achates often tried,
And young Ascanius, weeping by his side,
Conduct him to his tent. Scarce can he rear
His limbs from earth, supported on his spear.
Resolv'd in mind, regardless of the smart,
He tugs with both his hands, and breaks the dart.
The steel remains. No readier way he found
To draw the weapon, than t' inlarge the wound.
Eager of fight, impatient of delay,
He begs; and his unwilling friends obey.

Iapis was at hand to prove his art,
Whose blooming youth so fir'd Apollo's heart,
That, for his love, he proffer'd to bestow
His tuneful harp and his unerring bow.
The pious youth, more studious how to save
His aged sire, now sinking to the grave,
Preferr'd the pow'r of plants, and silent praise
Of healing arts, before Phoebean bays.

Propp'd on his lance the pensive hero stood,
And heard and saw, unmov'd, the mourning crowd.
The fam'd physician tucks his robes around
With ready hands, and hastens to the wound.
With gentle touches he performs his part,
This way and that, soliciting the dart,
And exercises all his heav'nly art.
All soft'ning simples, known of sov'reign use,
He presses out, and pours their noble juice.
These first infus'd, to lenify the pain,
He tugs with pincers, but he tugs in vain.
Then to the patron of his art he pray'd:
The patron of his art refus'd his aid.

Meantime the war approaches to the tents;
Th' alarm grows hotter, and the noise augments:
The driving dust proclaims the danger near;
And first their friends, and then their foes appear:
Their friends retreat; their foes pursue the rear.
The camp is fill'd with terror and affright:
The hissing shafts within the trench alight;
An undistinguish'd noise ascends the sky,
The shouts of those who kill, and groans of those who die.

But now the goddess mother, mov'd with grief,
And pierc'd with pity, hastens her relief.
A branch of healing dittany she brought,
Which in the Cretan fields with care she sought:
Rough is the stern, which woolly leafs surround;
The leafs with flow'rs, the flow'rs with purple crown'd,
Well known to wounded goats; a sure relief
To draw the pointed steel, and ease the grief.
This Venus brings, in clouds involv'd, and brews
Th' extracted liquor with ambrosian dews,
And odorous panacee. Unseen she stands,
Temp'ring the mixture with her heav'nly hands,
And pours it in a bowl, already crown'd
With juice of med'c'nal herbs prepar'd to bathe the wound.
The leech, unknowing of superior art
Which aids the cure, with this foments the part;
And in a moment ceas'd the raging smart.
Stanch'd is the blood, and in the bottom stands:
The steel, but scarcely touch'd with tender hands,
Moves up, and follows of its own accord,
And health and vigor are at once restor'd.
Iapis first perceiv'd the closing wound,
And first the footsteps of a god he found.
"Arms! arms!" he cries; "the sword and shield prepare,
And send the willing chief, renew'd, to war.
This is no mortal work, no cure of mine,
Nor art's effect, but done by hands divine.
Some god our general to the battle sends;
Some god preserves his life for greater ends."

The hero arms in haste; his hands infold
His thighs with cuishes of refulgent gold:
Inflam'd to fight, and rushing to the field,
That hand sustaining the celestial shield,
This gripes the lance, and with such vigor shakes,
That to the rest the beamy weapon quakes.
Then with a close embrace he strain'd his son,
And, kissing thro' his helmet, thus begun:
"My son, from my example learn the war,
In camps to suffer, and in fields to dare;
But happier chance than mine attend thy care!
This day my hand thy tender age shall shield,
And crown with honors of the conquer'd field:
Thou, when thy riper years shall send thee forth
To toils of war, be mindful of my worth;
Assert thy birthright, and in arms be known,
For Hector's nephew, and Aeneas' son."
He said; and, striding, issued on the plain.
Anteus and Mnestheus, and a num'rous train,
Attend his steps; the rest their weapons take,
And, crowding to the field, the camp forsake.
A cloud of blinding dust is rais'd around,
Labors beneath their feet the trembling ground.

Now Turnus, posted on a hill, from far
Beheld the progress of the moving war:
With him the Latins view'd the cover'd plains,
And the chill blood ran backward in their veins.
Juturna saw th' advancing troops appear,
And heard the hostile sound, and fled for fear.
Aeneas leads; and draws a sweeping train,
Clos'd in their ranks, and pouring on the plain.
As when a whirlwind, rushing to the shore
From the mid ocean, drives the waves before;
The painful hind with heavy heart foresees
The flatted fields, and slaughter of the trees;
With like impetuous rage the prince appears
Before his doubled front, nor less destruction bears.
And now both armies shock in open field;
Osiris is by strong Thymbraeus kill'd.
Archetius, Ufens, Epulon, are slain
(All fam'd in arms, and of the Latian train)
By Gyas', Mnestheus', and Achates' hand.
The fatal augur falls, by whose command
The truce was broken, and whose lance, embrued
With Trojan blood, th' unhappy fight renew'd.
Loud shouts and clamors rend the liquid sky,
And o'er the field the frighted Latins fly.
The prince disdains the dastards to pursue,
Nor moves to meet in arms the fighting few;
Turnus alone, amid the dusky plain,
He seeks, and to the combat calls in vain.
Juturna heard, and, seiz'd with mortal fear,
Forc'd from the beam her brother's charioteer;
Assumes his shape, his armor, and his mien,
And, like Metiscus, in his seat is seen.

As the black swallow near the palace plies;
O'er empty courts, and under arches, flies;
Now hawks aloft, now skims along the flood,
To furnish her loquacious nest with food:
So drives the rapid goddess o'er the plains;
The smoking horses run with loosen'd reins.
She steers a various course among the foes;
Now here, now there, her conqu'ring brother shows;
Now with a straight, now with a wheeling flight,
She turns, and bends, but shuns the single fight.
Aeneas, fir'd with fury, breaks the crowd,
And seeks his foe, and calls by name aloud:
He runs within a narrower ring, and tries
To stop the chariot; but the chariot flies.
If he but gain a glimpse, Juturna fears,
And far away the Daunian hero bears.

What should he do! Nor arts nor arms avail;
And various cares in vain his mind assail.
The great Messapus, thund'ring thro' the field,
In his left hand two pointed jav'lins held:
Encount'ring on the prince, one dart he drew,
And with unerring aim and utmost vigor threw.
Aeneas saw it come, and, stooping low
Beneath his buckler, shunn'd the threat'ning blow.
The weapon hiss'd above his head, and tore
The waving plume which on his helm he wore.
Forced by this hostile act, and fir'd with spite,
That flying Turnus still declin'd the fight,
The Prince, whose piety had long repell'd
His inborn ardor, now invades the field;
Invokes the pow'rs of violated peace,
Their rites and injur'd altars to redress;
Then, to his rage abandoning the rein,
With blood and slaughter'd bodies fills the plain.

What god can tell, what numbers can display,
The various labors of that fatal day;
What chiefs and champions fell on either side,
In combat slain, or by what deaths they died;
Whom Turnus, whom the Trojan hero kill'd;
Who shar'd the fame and fortune of the field!
Jove, could'st thou view, and not avert thy sight,
Two jarring nations join'd in cruel fight,
Whom leagues of lasting love so shortly shall unite!

Aeneas first Rutulian Sucro found,
Whose valor made the Trojans quit their ground;
Betwixt his ribs the jav'lin drove so just,
It reach'd his heart, nor needs a second thrust.
Now Turnus, at two blows, two brethren slew;
First from his horse fierce Amycus he threw:
Then, leaping on the ground, on foot assail'd
Diores, and in equal fight prevail'd.
Their lifeless trunks he leaves upon the place;
Their heads, distilling gore, his chariot grace.

Three cold on earth the Trojan hero threw,
Whom without respite at one charge he slew:
Cethegus, Tanais, Tagus, fell oppress'd,
And sad Onythes, added to the rest,
Of Theban blood, whom Peridia bore.

Turnus two brothers from the Lycian shore,
And from Apollo's fane to battle sent,
O'erthrew; nor Phoebus could their fate prevent.
Peaceful Menoetes after these he kill'd,
Who long had shunn'd the dangers of the field:
On Lerna's lake a silent life he led,
And with his nets and angle earn'd his bread;
Nor pompous cares, nor palaces, he knew,
But wisely from th' infectious world withdrew:
Poor was his house; his father's painful hand
Discharg'd his rent, and plow'd another's land.

As flames among the lofty woods are thrown
On diff'rent sides, and both by winds are blown;
The laurels crackle in the sputt'ring fire;
The frighted sylvans from their shades retire:
Or as two neighb'ring torrents fall from high;
Rapid they run; the foamy waters fry;
They roll to sea with unresisted force,
And down the rocks precipitate their course:
Not with less rage the rival heroes take
Their diff'rent ways, nor less destruction make.
With spears afar, with swords at hand, they strike;
And zeal of slaughter fires their souls alike.
Like them, their dauntless men maintain the field;
And hearts are pierc'd, unknowing how to yield:
They blow for blow return, and wound for wound;
And heaps of bodies raise the level ground.

Murranus, boasting of his blood, that springs
From a long royal race of Latian kings,
Is by the Trojan from his chariot thrown,
Crush'd with the weight of an unwieldy stone:
Betwixt the wheels he fell; the wheels, that bore
His living load, his dying body tore.
His starting steeds, to shun the glitt'ring sword,
Paw down his trampled limbs, forgetful of their lord.

Fierce Hyllus threaten'd high, and, face to face,
Affronted Turnus in the middle space:
The prince encounter'd him in full career,
And at his temples aim'd the deadly spear;
So fatally the flying weapon sped,
That thro' his helm it pierc'd his head.
Nor, Cisseus, couldst thou scape from Turnus' hand,
In vain the strongest of th' Arcadian band:
Nor to Cupentus could his gods afford
Availing aid against th' Aenean sword,
Which to his naked heart pursued the course;
Nor could his plated shield sustain the force.

Iolas fell, whom not the Grecian pow'rs,
Nor great subverter of the Trojan tow'rs,
Were doom'd to kill, while Heav'n prolong'd his date;
But who can pass the bounds, prefix'd by fate?
In high Lyrnessus, and in Troy, he held
Two palaces, and was from each expell'd:
Of all the mighty man, the last remains
A little spot of foreign earth contains.

And now both hosts their broken troops unite
In equal ranks, and mix in mortal fight.
Seresthus and undaunted Mnestheus join
The Trojan, Tuscan, and Arcadian line:
Sea-born Messapus, with Atinas, heads
The Latin squadrons, and to battle leads.
They strike, they push, they throng the scanty space,
Resolv'd on death, impatient of disgrace;
And, where one falls, another fills his place.

The Cyprian goddess now inspires her son
To leave th' unfinish'd fight, and storm the town:
For, while he rolls his eyes around the plain
In quest of Turnus, whom he seeks in vain,
He views th' unguarded city from afar,
In careless quiet, and secure of war.
Occasion offers, and excites his mind
To dare beyond the task he first design'd.
Resolv'd, he calls his chiefs; they leave the fight:
Attended thus, he takes a neighb'ring height;
The crowding troops about their gen'ral stand,
All under arms, and wait his high command.
Then thus the lofty prince: "Hear and obey,
Ye Trojan bands, without the least delay
Jove is with us; and what I have decreed
Requires our utmost vigor, and our speed.
Your instant arms against the town prepare,
The source of mischief, and the seat of war.
This day the Latian tow'rs, that mate the sky,
Shall level with the plain in ashes lie:
The people shall be slaves, unless in time
They kneel for pardon, and repent their crime.
Twice have our foes been vanquish'd on the plain:
Then shall I wait till Turnus will be slain?
Your force against the perjur'd city bend.
There it began, and there the war shall end.
The peace profan'd our rightful arms requires;
Cleanse the polluted place with purging fires."

He finish'd; and, one soul inspiring all,
Form'd in a wedge, the foot approach the wall.
Without the town, an unprovided train
Of gaping, gazing citizens are slain.
Some firebrands, others scaling ladders bear,
And those they toss aloft, and these they rear:
The flames now launch'd, the feather'd arrows fly,
And clouds of missive arms obscure the sky.
Advancing to the front, the hero stands,
And, stretching out to heav'n his pious hands,
Attests the gods, asserts his innocence,
Upbraids with breach of faith th' Ausonian prince;
Declares the royal honor doubly stain'd,
And twice the rites of holy peace profan'd.

Dissenting clamors in the town arise;
Each will be heard, and all at once advise.
One part for peace, and one for war contends;
Some would exclude their foes, and some admit their friends.
The helpless king is hurried in the throng,
And, whate'er tide prevails, is borne along.
Thus, when the swain, within a hollow rock,
Invades the bees with suffocating smoke,
They run around, or labor on their wings,
Disus'd to flight, and shoot their sleepy stings;
To shun the bitter fumes in vain they try;
Black vapors, issuing from the vent, involve the sky.

But fate and envious fortune now prepare
To plunge the Latins in the last despair.
The queen, who saw the foes invade the town,
And brands on tops of burning houses thrown,
Cast round her eyes, distracted with her fear-
No troops of Turnus in the field appear.
Once more she stares abroad, but still in vain,
And then concludes the royal youth is slain.
Mad with her anguish, impotent to bear
The mighty grief, she loathes the vital air.
She calls herself the cause of all this ill,
And owns the dire effects of her ungovern'd will;
She raves against the gods; she beats her breast;
She tears with both her hands her purple vest:
Then round a beam a running noose she tied,
And, fasten'd by the neck, obscenely died.

Soon as the fatal news by Fame was blown,
And to her dames and to her daughter known,
The sad Lavinia rends her yellow hair
And rosy cheeks; the rest her sorrow share:
With shrieks the palace rings, and madness of despair.
The spreading rumor fills the public place:
Confusion, fear, distraction, and disgrace,
And silent shame, are seen in ev'ry face.
Latinus tears his garments as he goes,
Both for his public and his private woes;
With filth his venerable beard besmears,
And sordid dust deforms his silver hairs.
And much he blames the softness of his mind,
Obnoxious to the charms of womankind,
And soon seduc'd to change what he so well design'd;
To break the solemn league so long desir'd,
Nor finish what his fates, and those of Troy, requir'd.

Now Turnus rolls aloof o'er empty plains,
And here and there some straggling foes he gleans.
His flying coursers please him less and less,
Asham'd of easy fight and cheap success.
Thus half-contented, anxious in his mind,
The distant cries come driving in the wind,
Shouts from the walls, but shouts in murmurs drown'd;
A jarring mixture, and a boding sound.
"Alas!" said he, "what mean these dismal cries?
What doleful clamors from the town arise?"
Confus'd, he stops, and backward pulls the reins.
She who the driver's office now sustains,
Replies: "Neglect, my lord, these new alarms;
Here fight, and urge the fortune of your arms:
There want not others to defend the wall.
If by your rival's hand th' Italians fall,
So shall your fatal sword his friends oppress,
In honor equal, equal in success."

To this, the prince: "O sister- for I knew
The peace infring'd proceeded first from you;
I knew you, when you mingled first in fight;
And now in vain you would deceive my sight-
Why, goddess, this unprofitable care?
Who sent you down from heav'n, involv'd in air,
Your share of mortal sorrows to sustain,
And see your brother bleeding on the plain?
For to what pow'r can Turnus have recourse,
Or how resist his fate's prevailing force?
These eyes beheld Murranus bite the ground:
Mighty the man, and mighty was the wound.
I heard my dearest friend, with dying breath,
My name invoking to revenge his death.
Brave Ufens fell with honor on the place,
To shun the shameful sight of my disgrace.
On earth supine, a manly corpse he lies;
His vest and armor are the victor's prize.
Then, shall I see Laurentum in a flame,
Which only wanted, to complete my shame?
How will the Latins hoot their champion's flight!
How Drances will insult and point them to the sight!
Is death so hard to bear? Ye gods below,
(Since those above so small compassion show,)
Receive a soul unsullied yet with shame,
Which not belies my great forefather's name!"

He said; and while he spoke, with flying speed
Came Sages urging on his foamy steed:
Fix'd on his wounded face a shaft he bore,
And, seeking Turnus, sent his voice before:
"Turnus, on you, on you alone, depends
Our last relief: compassionate your friends!
Like lightning, fierce Aeneas, rolling on,
With arms invests, with flames invades the town:
The brands are toss'd on high; the winds conspire
To drive along the deluge of the fire.
All eyes are fix'd on you: your foes rejoice;
Ev'n the king staggers, and suspends his choice;
Doubts to deliver or defend the town,
Whom to reject, or whom to call his son.
The queen, on whom your utmost hopes were plac'd,
Herself suborning death, has breath'd her last.
'T is true, Messapus, fearless of his fate,
With fierce Atinas' aid, defends the gate:
On ev'ry side surrounded by the foe,
The more they kill, the greater numbers grow;
An iron harvest mounts, and still remains to mow.
You, far aloof from your forsaken bands,
Your rolling chariot drive o'er empty sands.

Stupid he sate, his eyes on earth declin'd,
And various cares revolving in his mind:
Rage, boiling from the bottom of his breast,
And sorrow mix'd with shame, his soul oppress'd;
And conscious worth lay lab'ring in his thought,
And love by jealousy to madness wrought.
By slow degrees his reason drove away
The mists of passion, and resum'd her sway.
Then, rising on his car, he turn'd his look,
And saw the town involv'd in fire and smoke.
A wooden tow'r with flames already blaz'd,
Which his own hands on beams and rafters rais'd;
And bridges laid above to join the space,
And wheels below to roll from place to place.
"Sister, the Fates have vanquish'd: let us go
The way which Heav'n and my hard fortune show.
The fight is fix'd; nor shall the branded name
Of a base coward blot your brother's fame.
Death is my choice; but suffer me to try
My force, and vent my rage before I die."
He said; and, leaping down without delay,
Thro' crowds of scatter'd foes he freed his way.
Striding he pass'd, impetuous as the wind,
And left the grieving goddess far behind.
As when a fragment, from a mountain torn
By raging tempests, or by torrents borne,
Or sapp'd by time, or loosen'd from the roots-
Prone thro' the void the rocky ruin shoots,
Rolling from crag to crag, from steep to steep;
Down sink, at once, the shepherds and their sheep:
Involv'd alike, they rush to nether ground;
Stunn'd with the shock they fall, and stunn'd from earth rebound:
So Turnus, hasting headlong to the town,
Should'ring and shoving, bore the squadrons down.
Still pressing onward, to the walls he drew,
Where shafts, and spears, and darts promiscuous flew,
And sanguine streams the slipp'ry ground embrue.
First stretching out his arm, in sign of peace,
He cries aloud, to make the combat cease:
"Rutulians, hold; and Latin troops, retire!
The fight is mine; and me the gods require.
'T is just that I should vindicate alone
The broken truce, or for the breach atone.
This day shall free from wars th' Ausonian state,
Or finish my misfortunes in my fate."

Both armies from their bloody work desist,
And, bearing backward, form a spacious list.
The Trojan hero, who receiv'd from fame
The welcome sound, and heard the champion's name,
Soon leaves the taken works and mounted walls,
Greedy of war where greater glory calls.
He springs to fight, exulting in his force
His jointed armor rattles in the course.
Like Eryx, or like Athos, great he shows,
Or Father Apennine, when, white with snows,
His head divine obscure in clouds he hides,
And shakes the sounding forest on his sides.
The nations, overaw'd, surcease the fight;
Immovable their bodies, fix'd their sight.
Ev'n death stands still; nor from above they throw
Their darts, nor drive their batt'ring-rams below.
In silent order either army stands,
And drop their swords, unknowing, from their hands.
Th' Ausonian king beholds, with wond'ring sight,
Two mighty champions match'd in single fight,
Born under climes remote, and brought by fate,
With swords to try their titles to the state.

Now, in clos'd field, each other from afar
They view; and, rushing on, begin the war.
They launch their spears; then hand to hand they meet;
The trembling soil resounds beneath their feet:
Their bucklers clash; thick blows descend from high,
And flakes of fire from their hard helmets fly.
Courage conspires with chance, and both ingage
With equal fortune yet, and mutual rage.
As when two bulls for their fair female fight
In Sila's shades, or on Taburnus' height;
With horns adverse they meet; the keeper flies;
Mute stands the herd; the heifers roll their eyes,
And wait th' event; which victor they shall bear,
And who shall be the lord, to rule the lusty year:
With rage of love the jealous rivals burn,
And push for push, and wound for wound return;
Their dewlaps gor'd, their sides are lav'd in blood;
Loud cries and roaring sounds rebellow thro' the wood:
Such was the combat in the listed ground;
So clash their swords, and so their shields resound.

Jove sets the beam; in either scale he lays
The champions' fate, and each exactly weighs.
On this side, life and lucky chance ascends;
Loaded with death, that other scale descends.
Rais'd on the stretch, young Turnus aims a blow
Full on the helm of his unguarded foe:
Shrill shouts and clamors ring on either side,
As hopes and fears their panting hearts divide.
But all in pieces flies the traitor sword,
And, in the middle stroke, deserts his lord.
Now is but death, or flight; disarm'd he flies,
When in his hand an unknown hilt he spies.
Fame says that Turnus, when his steeds he join'd,
Hurrying to war, disorder'd in his mind,
Snatch'd the first weapon which his haste could find.
'T was not the fated sword his father bore,
But that his charioteer Metiscus wore.
This, while the Trojans fled, the toughness held;
But, vain against the great Vulcanian shield,
The mortal-temper'd steel deceiv'd his hand:
The shiver'd fragments shone amid the sand.

Surpris'd with fear, he fled along the field,
And now forthright, and now in orbits wheel'd;
For here the Trojan troops the list surround,
And there the pass is clos'd with pools and marshy ground.
Aeneas hastens, tho' with heavier pace-
His wound, so newly knit, retards the chase,
And oft his trembling knees their aid refuse-
Yet, pressing foot by foot, his foe pursues.

Thus, when a fearful stag is clos'd around
With crimson toils, or in a river found,
High on the bank the deep-mouth'd hound appears,
Still opening, following still, where'er he steers;
The persecuted creature, to and fro,
Turns here and there, to scape his Umbrian foe:
Steep is th' ascent, and, if he gains the land,
The purple death is pitch'd along the strand.
His eager foe, determin'd to the chase,
Stretch'd at his length, gains ground at ev'ry pace;
Now to his beamy head he makes his way,
And now he holds, or thinks he holds, his prey:
Just at the pinch, the stag springs out with fear;
He bites the wind, and fills his sounding jaws with air:
The rocks, the lakes, the meadows ring with cries;
The mortal tumult mounts, and thunders in the skies.
Thus flies the Daunian prince, and, flying, blames
His tardy troops, and, calling by their names,
Demands his trusty sword. The Trojan threats
The realm with ruin, and their ancient seats
To lay in ashes, if they dare supply
With arms or aid his vanquish'd enemy:
Thus menacing, he still pursues the course,
With vigor, tho' diminish'd of his force.
Ten times already round the listed place
One chief had fled, and t' other giv'n the chase:
No trivial prize is play'd; for on the life
Or death of Turnus now depends the strife.

Within the space, an olive tree had stood,
A sacred shade, a venerable wood,
For vows to Faunus paid, the Latins' guardian god.
Here hung the vests, and tablets were ingrav'd,
Of sinking mariners from shipwrack sav'd.
With heedless hands the Trojans fell'd the tree,
To make the ground inclos'd for combat free.
Deep in the root, whether by fate, or chance,
Or erring haste, the Trojan drove his lance;
Then stoop'd, and tugg'd with force immense, to free
Th' incumber'd spear from the tenacious tree;
That, whom his fainting limbs pursued in vain,
His flying weapon might from far attain.

Confus'd with fear, bereft of human aid,
Then Turnus to the gods, and first to Faunus pray'd:
"O Faunus, pity! and thou Mother Earth,
Where I thy foster son receiv'd my birth,
Hold fast the steel! If my religious hand
Your plant has honor'd, which your foes profan'd,
Propitious hear my pious pray'r!" He said,
Nor with successless vows invok'd their aid.
Th' incumbent hero wrench'd, and pull'd, and strain'd;
But still the stubborn earth the steel detain'd.
Juturna took her time; and, while in vain
He strove, assum'd Meticus' form again,
And, in that imitated shape, restor'd
To the despairing prince his Daunian sword.
The Queen of Love, who, with disdain and grief,
Saw the bold nymph afford this prompt relief,
T' assert her offspring with a greater deed,
From the tough root the ling'ring weapon freed.

Once more erect, the rival chiefs advance:
One trusts the sword, and one the pointed lance;
And both resolv'd alike to try their fatal chance.

Meantime imperial Jove to Juno spoke,
Who from a shining cloud beheld the shock:
"What new arrest, O Queen of Heav'n, is sent
To stop the Fates now lab'ring in th' event?
What farther hopes are left thee to pursue?
Divine Aeneas, (and thou know'st it too,)
Foredoom'd, to these celestial seats are due.
What more attempts for Turnus can be made,
That thus thou ling'rest in this lonely shade?
Is it becoming of the due respect
And awful honor of a god elect,
A wound unworthy of our state to feel,
Patient of human hands and earthly steel?
Or seems it just, the sister should restore
A second sword, when one was lost before,
And arm a conquer'd wretch against his conqueror?
For what, without thy knowledge and avow,
Nay more, thy dictate, durst Juturna do?
At last, in deference to my love, forbear
To lodge within thy soul this anxious care;
Reclin'd upon my breast, thy grief unload:
Who should relieve the goddess, but the god?
Now all things to their utmost issue tend,
Push'd by the Fates to their appointed
While leave was giv'n thee, and a lawful hour
For vengeance, wrath, and unresisted pow'r,
Toss'd on the seas, thou couldst thy foes distress,
And, driv'n ashore, with hostile arms oppress;
Deform the royal house; and, from the side
Of the just bridegroom, tear the plighted bride:
Now cease at my command." The Thund'rer said;
And, with dejected eyes, this answer Juno made:
"Because your dread decree too well I knew,
From Turnus and from earth unwilling I withdrew.
Else should you not behold me here, alone,
Involv'd in empty clouds, my friends bemoan,
But, girt with vengeful flames, in open sight
Engag'd against my foes in mortal fight.
'T is true, Juturna mingled in the strife
By my command, to save her brother's life-
At least to try; but, by the Stygian lake,
(The most religious oath the gods can take,)
With this restriction, not to bend the bow,
Or toss the spear, or trembling dart to throw.
And now, resign'd to your superior might,
And tir'd with fruitless toils, I loathe the fight.
This let me beg (and this no fates withstand)
Both for myself and for your father's land,
That, when the nuptial bed shall bind the peace,
(Which I, since you ordain, consent to bless,)
The laws of either nation be the same;
But let the Latins still retain their name,
Speak the same language which they spoke before,
Wear the same habits which their grandsires wore.
Call them not Trojans: perish the renown
And name of Troy, with that detested town.
Latium be Latium still; let Alba reign
And Rome's immortal majesty remain."

Then thus the founder of mankind replies
(Unruffled was his front, serene his eyes)
"Can Saturn's issue, and heav'n's other heir,
Such endless anger in her bosom bear?
Be mistress, and your full desires obtain;
But quench the choler you foment in vain.
From ancient blood th' Ausonian people sprung,
Shall keep their name, their habit, and their tongue.
The Trojans to their customs shall be tied:
I will, myself, their common rites provide;
The natives shall command, the foreigners subside.
All shall be Latium; Troy without a name;
And her lost sons forget from whence they came.
From blood so mix'd, a pious race shall flow,
Equal to gods, excelling all below.
No nation more respect to you shall pay,
Or greater off'rings on your altars lay."
Juno consents, well pleas'd that her desires
Had found success, and from the cloud retires.

The peace thus made, the Thund'rer next prepares
To force the wat'ry goddess from the wars.
Deep in the dismal regions void of light,
Three daughters at a birth were born to Night:
These their brown mother, brooding on her care,
Indued with windy wings to flit in air,
With serpents girt alike, and crown'd with hissing hair.
In heav'n the Dirae call'd, and still at hand,
Before the throne of angry Jove they stand,
His ministers of wrath, and ready still
The minds of mortal men with fears to fill,
Whene'er the moody sire, to wreak his hate
On realms or towns deserving of their fate,
Hurls down diseases, death and deadly care,
And terrifies the guilty world with war.
One sister plague if these from heav'n he sent,
To fright Juturna with a dire portent.
The pest comes whirling down: by far more slow
Springs the swift arrow from the Parthian bow,
Or Cydon yew, when, traversing the skies,
And drench'd in pois'nous juice, the sure destruction flies.
With such a sudden and unseen a flight
Shot thro' the clouds the daughter of the night.
Soon as the field inclos'd she had in view,
And from afar her destin'd quarry knew,
Contracted, to the boding bird she turns,
Which haunts the ruin'd piles and hallow'd urns,
And beats about the tombs with nightly wings,
Where songs obscene on sepulchers she sings.
Thus lessen'd in her form, with frightful cries
The Fury round unhappy Turnus flies,
Flaps on his shield, and flutters o'er his eyes.

A lazy chillness crept along his blood;
Chok'd was his voice; his hair with horror stood.
Juturna from afar beheld her fly,
And knew th' ill omen, by her screaming cry
And stridor of her wings. Amaz'd with fear,
Her beauteous breast she beat, and rent her flowing hair.

"Ah me!" she cries, "in this unequal strife
What can thy sister more to save thy life?
Weak as I am, can I, alas! contend
In arms with that inexorable fiend?
Now, now, I quit the field! forbear to fright
My tender soul, ye baleful birds of night;
The lashing of your wings I know too well,
The sounding flight, and fun'ral screams of hell!
These are the gifts you bring from haughty Jove,
The worthy recompense of ravish'd love!
Did he for this exempt my life from fate?
O hard conditions of immortal state,
Tho' born to death, not privileg'd to die,
But forc'd to bear impos'd eternity!
Take back your envious bribes, and let me go
Companion to my brother's ghost below!
The joys are vanish'd: nothing now remains,
Of life immortal, but immortal pains.
What earth will open her devouring womb,
To rest a weary goddess in the tomb!"
She drew a length of sighs; nor more she said,
But in her azure mantle wrapp'd her head,
Then plung'd into her stream, with deep despair,
And her last sobs came bubbling up in air.

Now stern Aeneas his weighty spear
Against his foe, and thus upbraids his fear:
"What farther subterfuge can Turnus find?
What empty hopes are harbor'd in his mind?
'T is not thy swiftness can secure thy flight;
Not with their feet, but hands, the valiant fight.
Vary thy shape in thousand forms, and dare
What skill and courage can attempt in war;
Wish for the wings of winds, to mount the sky;
Or hid, within the hollow earth to lie!"
The champion shook his head, and made this short reply:
"No threats of thine my manly mind can move;
'T is hostile heav'n I dread, and partial Jove."
He said no more, but, with a sigh, repress'd
The mighty sorrow in his swelling breast.

Then, as he roll'd his troubled eyes around,
An antique stone he saw, the common bound
Of neighb'ring fields, and barrier of the ground;
So vast, that twelve strong men of modern days
Th' enormous weight from earth could hardly raise.
He heav'd it at a lift, and, pois'd on high,
Ran stagg'ring on against his enemy,
But so disorder'd, that he scarcely knew
His way, or what unwieldly weight he threw.
His knocking knees are bent beneath the load,
And shiv'ring cold congeals his vital blood.
The stone drops from his arms, and, falling short
For want of vigor, mocks his vain effort.
And as, when heavy sleep has clos'd the sight,
The sickly fancy labors in the night;
We seem to run; and, destitute of force,
Our sinking limbs forsake us in the course:
In vain we heave for breath; in vain we cry;
The nerves, unbrac'd, their usual strength deny;
And on the tongue the falt'ring accents die:
So Turnus far'd; whatever means he tried,
All force of arms and points of art employ'd,
The Fury flew athwart, and made th' endeavor void.

A thousand various thoughts his soul confound;
He star'd about, nor aid nor issue found;
His own men stop the pass, and his own walls surround.
Once more he pauses, and looks out again,
And seeks the goddess charioteer in vain.
Trembling he views the thund'ring chief advance,
And brandishing aloft the deadly lance:
Amaz'd he cow'rs beneath his conqu'ring foe,
Forgets to ward, and waits the coming blow.
Astonish'd while he stands, and fix'd with fear,
Aim'd at his shield he sees th' impending spear.

The hero measur'd first, with narrow view,
The destin'd mark; and, rising as he threw,
With its full swing the fatal weapon flew.
Not with less rage the rattling thunder falls,
Or stones from batt'ring-engines break the walls:
Swift as a whirlwind, from an arm so strong,
The lance drove on, and bore the death along.
Naught could his sev'nfold shield the prince avail,
Nor aught, beneath his arms, the coat of mail:
It pierc'd thro' all, and with a grisly wound
Transfix'd his thigh, and doubled him to ground.
With groans the Latins rend the vaulted sky:
Woods, hills, and valleys, to the voice reply.

Now low on earth the lofty chief is laid,
With eyes cast upward, and with arms display'd,
And, recreant, thus to the proud victor pray'd:
"I know my death deserv'd, nor hope to live:
Use what the gods and thy good fortune give.
Yet think, O think, if mercy may be shown-
Thou hadst a father once, and hast a son-
Pity my sire, now sinking to the grave;
And for Anchises' sake old Daunus save!
Or, if thy vow'd revenge pursue my death,
Give to my friends my body void of breath!
The Latian chiefs have seen me beg my life;
Thine is the conquest, thine the royal wife:
Against a yielded man, 't is mean ignoble strife."

In deep suspense the Trojan seem'd to stand,
And, just prepar'd to strike, repress'd his hand.
He roll'd his eyes, and ev'ry moment felt
His manly soul with more compassion melt;
When, casting down a casual glance, he spied
The golden belt that glitter'd on his side,
The fatal spoils which haughty Turnus tore
From dying Pallas, and in triumph wore.
Then, rous'd anew to wrath, he loudly cries
(Flames, while he spoke, came flashing from his eyes)
"Traitor, dost thou, dost thou to grace pretend,
Clad, as thou art, in trophies of my friend?
To his sad soul a grateful off'ring go!
'T is Pallas, Pallas gives this deadly blow."
He rais'd his arm aloft, and, at the word,
Deep in his bosom drove the shining sword.
The streaming blood distain'd his arms around,
And the disdainful soul came rushing thro' the wound.

**
Verses to Her Royal Highness the Duchess of York
***

When for our sakes your Heroe you resignd
To swelling Seas and every faithless wind;
When you releasd his Courage and set free
A Valour fatal to the Enemy,
You lodgd your Countries cares within your breast,
(The mansion where soft love should only rest:)
And ere our Foes abroad were overcome,
The noblest conquest you had gaind at home.
Ah, what concerns did both your Souls divide!
Your Honour gave us what your Love denid:
And twas for him much easier to subdue
Those Foes he fought with, than to part from you.
That glorious day, which two such Navies saw
As each, unmatchd, might to the world give Law,
Neptune, yet doubtful whom he should obey,
Held to them both the Trident of the Sea:
The Winds were hushd, the Waves in ranks were cast,
As awfully as when Gods People past:
Those, yet uncertain on whose Sails to blow,
These, where the wealth of Nations ought to flow.
Then with the Duke your Highness ruld the day:
While all the Brave did his Command obey,
The Fair and Pious under you did pray.
How powrful are chast Vows! the Wind and Tyde
You bribd to combat on the English side.
Thus to your much loved Lord you did convey
An unknown succour, sent the nearest way.
New vigour to his wearied arms you brought
(So Moses was upheld while Israel fought.)
While, from afar, we heard the Cannon play,
Like distant Thunder on a shiny day.
For absent Friends we were ashamd to fear,
When we considerd what you venturd there.
Ships, Men and Arms our Country might restore,
But such a Leader could supply no more.
With generous thoughts of Conquest he did burn,
Yet fought not more to vanquish than return.
Fortune and Victory he did persue
To bring them as his Slaves, to wait on you:
Thus Beauty ravishd the rewards of Fame
And the Fair triumphd when the Brave orecame.
Then, as you meant to spread another way
By Land your Conquests far as his by Sea,
Leaving our Southern Clime, you marchd along
The stubborn North, ten thousand Cupids strong.
Like Commons the Nobility resort,
In crowding heaps, to fill your moving Court:
To welcome your approach the Vulgar run,
Like some new Envoy from the distant Sun,
And Country Beauties by their Lovers go,
Blessing themselves, and wondring at the show.
So, when the New-born Phnix first is seen,
Her featherd Subjects all adore their Queen,
And, while She makes her Progress through the East,
From every Grove her numerous Trains increast:
Each Poet of the air her Glory sings,
And round him the pleasd Audience clap their Wings.

**
Mac Flecknoe
***

All human things are subject to decay, 
And, when Fate summons, monarchs must obey: 
This Flecknoe found, who, like Augustus, young 
Was call'd to empire, and had govern'd long: 
In prose and verse, was own'd, without dispute 
Through all the realms of Non-sense, absolute. 
This aged prince now flourishing in peace, 
And blest with issue of a large increase, 
Worn out with business, did at length debate 
To settle the succession of the State: 
And pond'ring which of all his sons was fit 
To reign, and wage immortal war with wit; 
Cry'd, 'tis resolv'd; for nature pleads that he 
Should only rule, who most resembles me: 
Shadwell alone my perfect image bears, 
Mature in dullness from his tender years. 
Shadwell alone, of all my sons, is he 
Who stands confirm'd in full stupidity. 
The rest to some faint meaning make pretence, 
But Shadwell never deviates into sense. 
Some beams of wit on other souls may fall, 
Strike through and make a lucid interval; 
But Shadwell's genuine night admits no ray, 
His rising fogs prevail upon the day: 
Besides his goodly fabric fills the eye, 
And seems design'd for thoughtless majesty: 
Thoughtless as monarch oaks, that shade the plain, 
And, spread in solemn state, supinely reign. 
Heywood and Shirley were but types of thee, 
Thou last great prophet of tautology: 
Even I, a dunce of more renown than they, 
Was sent before but to prepare thy way; 
And coarsely clad in Norwich drugget came 
To teach the nations in thy greater name. 
My warbling lute, the lute I whilom strung 
When to King John of Portugal I sung, 
Was but the prelude to that glorious day, 
When thou on silver Thames did'st cut thy way, 
With well tim'd oars before the royal barge, 
Swell'd with the pride of thy celestial charge; 
And big with hymn, commander of an host, 
The like was ne'er in Epsom blankets toss'd. 
Methinks I see the new Arion sail, 
The lute still trembling underneath thy nail. 
At thy well sharpen'd thumb from shore to shore 
The treble squeaks for fear, the basses roar: 
Echoes from Pissing-Alley, Shadwell call, 
And Shadwell they resound from Aston Hall. 
About thy boat the little fishes throng, 
As at the morning toast, that floats along. 
Sometimes as prince of thy harmonious band 
Thou wield'st thy papers in thy threshing hand. 
St. Andre's feet ne'er kept more equal time, 
Not ev'n the feet of thy own Psyche's rhyme: 
Though they in number as in sense excel; 
So just, so like tautology they fell, 
That, pale with envy, Singleton forswore 
The lute and sword which he in triumph bore 
And vow'd he ne'er would act Villerius more. 
Here stopt the good old sire; and wept for joy 
In silent raptures of the hopeful boy. 
All arguments, but most his plays, persuade, 
That for anointed dullness he was made. 

Close to the walls which fair Augusta bind, 
(The fair Augusta much to fears inclin'd) 
An ancient fabric, rais'd t'inform the sight, 
There stood of yore, and Barbican it hight: 
A watch tower once; but now, so fate ordains, 
Of all the pile an empty name remains. 
From its old ruins brothel-houses rise, 
Scenes of lewd loves, and of polluted joys. 
Where their vast courts, the mother-strumpets keep, 
And, undisturb'd by watch, in silence sleep. 
Near these a nursery erects its head, 
Where queens are form'd, and future heroes bred; 
Where unfledg'd actors learn to laugh and cry, 
Where infant punks their tender voices try, 
And little Maximins the gods defy. 
Great Fletcher never treads in buskins here, 
Nor greater Jonson dares in socks appear; 
But gentle Simkin just reception finds 
Amidst this monument of vanish'd minds: 
Pure clinches, the suburbian muse affords; 
And Panton waging harmless war with words. 
Here Flecknoe, as a place to fame well known, 
Ambitiously design'd his Shadwell's throne. 
For ancient Decker prophesi'd long since, 
That in this pile should reign a mighty prince, 
Born for a scourge of wit, and flail of sense: 
To whom true dullness should some Psyches owe, 
But worlds of Misers from his pen should flow; 
Humorists and hypocrites it should produce, 
Whole Raymond families, and tribes of Bruce. 

Now Empress Fame had publisht the renown, 
Of Shadwell's coronation through the town. 
Rous'd by report of fame, the nations meet, 
From near Bun-Hill, and distant Watling-street. 
No Persian carpets spread th'imperial way, 
But scatter'd limbs of mangled poets lay: 
From dusty shops neglected authors come, 
Martyrs of pies, and reliques of the bum. 
Much Heywood, Shirley, Ogleby there lay, 
But loads of Shadwell almost chok'd the way. 
Bilk'd stationers for yeoman stood prepar'd, 
And Herringman was Captain of the Guard. 
The hoary prince in majesty appear'd, 
High on a throne of his own labours rear'd. 
At his right hand our young Ascanius sat 
Rome's other hope, and pillar of the state. 
His brows thick fogs, instead of glories, grace, 
And lambent dullness play'd around his face. 
As Hannibal did to the altars come, 
Sworn by his sire a mortal foe to Rome; 
So Shadwell swore, nor should his vow be vain, 
That he till death true dullness would maintain; 
And in his father's right, and realm's defence, 
Ne'er to have peace with wit, nor truce with sense. 
The king himself the sacred unction made, 
As king by office, and as priest by trade: 
In his sinister hand, instead of ball, 
He plac'd a mighty mug of potent ale; 
Love's kingdom to his right he did convey, 
At once his sceptre and his rule of sway; 
Whose righteous lore the prince had practis'd young, 
And from whose loins recorded Psyche sprung, 
His temples last with poppies were o'er spread, 
That nodding seem'd to consecrate his head: 
Just at that point of time, if fame not lie, 
On his left hand twelve reverend owls did fly. 
So Romulus, 'tis sung, by Tiber's brook, 
Presage of sway from twice six vultures took. 
Th'admiring throng loud acclamations make, 
And omens of his future empire take. 
The sire then shook the honours of his head, 
And from his brows damps of oblivion shed 
Full on the filial dullness: long he stood, 
Repelling from his breast the raging god; 
At length burst out in this prophetic mood: 

Heavens bless my son, from Ireland let him reign 
To far Barbadoes on the Western main; 
Of his dominion may no end be known, 
And greater than his father's be his throne. 
Beyond love's kingdom let him stretch his pen; 
He paus'd, and all the people cry'd Amen. 
Then thus, continu'd he, my son advance 
Still in new impudence, new ignorance. 
Success let other teach, learn thou from me 
Pangs without birth, and fruitless industry. 
Let Virtuosos in five years be writ; 
Yet not one thought accuse thy toil of wit. 
Let gentle George in triumph tread the stage, 
Make Dorimant betray, and Loveit rage; 
Let Cully, Cockwood, Fopling, charm the pit, 
And in their folly show the writer's wit. 
Yet still thy fools shall stand in thy defence, 
And justify their author's want of sense. 
Let 'em be all by thy own model made 
Of dullness, and desire no foreign aid: 
That they to future ages may be known, 
Not copies drawn, but issue of thy own. 
Nay let thy men of wit too be the same, 
All full of thee, and differing but in name; 
But let no alien Sedley interpose 
To lard with wit thy hungry Epsom prose. 
And when false flowers of rhetoric thou would'st cull, 
Trust Nature, do not labour to be dull; 
But write thy best, and top; and in each line, 
Sir Formal's oratory will be thine. 
Sir Formal, though unsought, attends thy quill, 
And does thy Northern Dedications fill. 
Nor let false friends seduce thy mind to fame, 
By arrogating Jonson's hostile name. 
Let Father Flecknoe fire thy mind with praise, 
And Uncle Ogleby thy envy raise. 
Thou art my blood, where Jonson has no part; 
What share have we in Nature or in Art? 
Where did his wit on learning fix a brand, 
And rail at arts he did not understand? 
Where made he love in Prince Nicander's vein, 
Or swept the dust in Psyche's humble strain? 
Where sold he bargains, whip-stitch, kiss my arse, 
Promis'd a play and dwindled to a farce? 
When did his muse from Fletcher scenes purloin, 
As thou whole Eth'ridge dost transfuse to thine? 
But so transfus'd as oil on waters flow, 
His always floats above, thine sinks below. 
This is thy province, this thy wondrous way, 
New humours to invent for each new play: 
This is that boasted bias of thy mind, 
By which one way, to dullness, 'tis inclin'd, 
Which makes thy writings lean on one side still, 
And in all changes that way bends thy will. 
Nor let thy mountain belly make pretence 
Of likeness; thine's a tympany of sense. 
A tun of man in thy large bulk is writ, 
But sure thou 'rt but a kilderkin of wit. 
Like mine thy gentle numbers feebly creep, 
Thy Tragic Muse gives smiles, thy Comic sleep. 
With whate'er gall thou sett'st thy self to write, 
Thy inoffensive satires never bite. 
In thy felonious heart, though venom lies, 
It does but touch thy Irish pen, and dies. 
Thy genius calls thee not to purchase fame 
In keen iambics, but mild anagram: 
Leave writing plays, and choose for thy command 
Some peaceful province in acrostic land. 
There thou may'st wings display and altars raise, 
And torture one poor word ten thousand ways. 
Or if thou would'st thy diff'rent talents suit, 
Set thy own songs, and sing them to thy lute. 
He said, but his last words were scarcely heard, 
For Bruce and Longvil had a trap prepar'd, 
And down they sent the yet declaiming bard. 
Sinking he left his drugget robe behind, 
Born upwards by a subterranean wind. 
The mantle fell to the young prophet's part, 
With double portion of his father's art.

**
Absalom and Achitophel
***

In pious times, ere priest-craft did begin, 
Before polygamy was made a sin; 
When man, on many, multipli'd his kind, 
Ere one to one was cursedly confin'd: 
When Nature prompted, and no Law deni'd 
Promiscuous use of concubine and bride; 
Then, Israel's monarch, after Heaven's own heart, 
His vigorous warmth did variously impart 
To wives and slaves: and, wide as his command, 
Scatter'd his Maker's image through the land. 
Michal, of royal blood, the crown did wear; 
A soil ungrateful to the tiller's care: 
Not so the rest; for several mothers bore 
To god-like David, several sons before. 
But since like slaves his bed they did ascend, 
No true succession could their seed attend. 
Of all this numerous progeny was none 
So beautiful, so brave, as Absalom: 
Whether, inspir'd by some diviner lust, 
His father got him with a greater gust; 
Or that his conscious destiny made way, 
By manly beauty to imperial sway. 
Early in foreign fields he won renown, 
With kings and states alli'd to Israel's crown: 
In peace the thoughts of war he could remove, 
And seem'd as he were only born for love. 
Whate'er he did, was done with so much ease, 
In him alone, 'twas natural to please: 
His motions all accompani'd with grace; 
And Paradise was open'd in his face. 
With secret joy, indulgent David view'd 
His youthful image in his son renew'd: 
To all his wishes nothing he deni'd; 
And made the charming Annabel his bride. 
What faults he had (for who from faults is free?) 
His father could not, or he would not see. 
Some warm excesses, which the Law forbore, 
Were constru'd youth that purged by boiling o'er: 
And Amnon's murther, by a specious name, 
Was call'd a just revenge for injur'd fame. 
Thus prais'd, and lov'd, the noble youth remain'd, 
While David, undisturb'd, in Sion reign'd. 
But life can never be sincerely blest: 
Heav'n punishes the bad, and proves the best. 
The Jews, a headstrong, moody, murm'ring race, 
As ever tri'd th'extent and stretch of grace; 
God's pamper'd people whom, debauch'd with ease, 
No king could govern, nor no God could please; 
(Gods they had tri'd of every shape and size, 
That god-smiths could produce, or priests devise:) 
These Adam-wits, too fortunately free, 
Began to dream they wanted liberty: 
And when no rule, no precedent, was found 
Of men, by laws less circumscrib'd and bound, 
They led their wild desires to woods and caves, 
And thought that all but savages were slaves. 
They who, when Saul was dead, without a blow, 
Made foolish Ishbosheth the crown forego; 
Who banisht David did from Hebron bring, 
And, with a general shout, proclaim'd him king: 
Those very Jews, who, at their very best, 
Their Humour more than loyalty exprest, 
Now, wonder'd why, so long, they had obey'd 
An idol-monarch which their hands had made: 
Thought they might ruin him they could create; 
Or melt him to that golden calf, a state. 
But these were random bolts: no form'd design, 
Nor interest made the factious crowd to join: 
The sober part of Israel, free from stain, 
Well knew the value of a peaceful reign: 
And, looking backward with a wise afright, 
Saw seams of wounds, dishonest to the sight: 
In contemplation of whose ugly scars, 
They curst the memory of civil wars. 
The moderate sort of men, thus qualifi'd, 
Inclin'd the balance to the better side: 
And, David's mildness manag'd it so well, 
The bad found no occasion to rebel. 
But, when to sin our bias'd nature leans, 
The careful Devil is still at hand with means; 
And providently pimps for ill desires: 
The good old cause reviv'd, a plot requires. 
Plots, true or false, are necessary things, 
To raise up common-wealths, and ruin kings. 

Th' inhabitants of old Jerusalem 
Were Jebusites: the town so call'd from them; 
And theirs the native right 
But when the chosen people grew more strong, 
The rightful cause at length became the wrong: 
And every loss the men of Jebus bore, 
They still were thought God's enemies the more. 
Thus, worn and weaken'd, well or ill content, 
Submit they must to David's government: 
Impoverish'd and depriv'd of all command, 
Their taxes doubled as they lost their land; 
And, what was harder yet to flesh and blood, 
Their gods disgrac'd, and burnt like common wood. 
This set the heathen priesthood in a flame; 
For priests of all religions are the same: 
Of whatsoe'er descent their godhead be, 
Stock, stone, or other homely pedigree, 
In his defence his servants are as bold, 
As if he had been born of beaten gold. 
The Jewish Rabbins though their Enemies, 
In this conclude them honest men and wise: 
For 'twas their duty, all the learned think, 
T'espouse his cause by whom they eat and drink. 
From hence began that plot, the nation's curse, 
Bad in itself, but represented worse. 
Rais'd in extremes, and in extremes decri'd; 
With oaths affirm'd, with dying vows deni'd. 
Not weigh'd, or winnow'd by the multitude; 
But swallow'd in the mass, unchew'd and crude. 
Some truth there was, but dash'd and brew'd with lies; 
To please the fools, and puzzle all the wise. 
Succeeding times did equal folly call, 
Believing nothing, or believing all. 
Th' Egyptian rites the Jebusites embrac'd; 
Where gods were recommended by their taste. 
Such sav'ry deities must needs be good, 
As serv'd at once for worship and for food. 
By force they could not introduce these gods; 
For ten to one, in former days was odds. 
So fraud was us'd, (the sacrificers' trade,) 
Fools are more hard to conquer than persuade. 
Their busy teachers mingled with the Jews; 
And rak'd, for converts, even the court and stews: 
Which Hebrew priests the more unkindly took, 
Because the fleece accompanies the flock. 
Some thought they God's anointed meant to slay 
By guns, invented since full many a day: 
Our author swears it not; but who can know 
How far the Devil and Jebusites may go? 
This plot, which fail'd for want of common sense, 
Had yet a deep and dangerous consequence: 
For, as when raging fevers boil the blood, 
The standing lake soon floats into a flood; 
And ev'ry hostile humour, which before 
Slept quiet in its channels, bubbles o'er: 
So, several factions from this first ferment, 
Work up to foam, and threat the government. 
Some by their friends, more by themselves thought wise, 
Oppos'd the pow'r, to which they could not rise. 
Some had in courts been great, and thrown from thence, 
Like fiends, were harden'd in impenitence. 
Some by their monarch's fatal mercy grown, 
From pardon'd rebels, kinsmen to the throne; 
Were rais'd in pow'r and public office high; 
Strong bands, if bands ungrateful men could tie. 

Of these the false Achitophel was first: 
A name to all succeeding ages curst. 
For close designs, and crooked counsels fit; 
Sagacious, bold and turbulent of wit: 
Restless, unfixt in principles and place; 
In pow'r unpleas'd, impatient of disgrace. 
A fiery soul, which working out its way, 
Fretted the pigmy-body to decay: 
And o'er inform'd the tenement of clay. 
A daring pilot in extremity; 
Pleas'd with the danger, when the waves went high 
He sought the storms; but for a calm unfit, 
Would steer too nigh the sands, to boast his wit. 
Great wits are sure to madness near alli'd; 
And thin partitions do their bounds divide: 
Else, why should he, with wealth and honour blest, 
Refuse his age the needful hours of rest? 
Punish a body which he could not please; 
Bankrupt of life, yet prodigal of ease? 
And all to leave, what with his toil he won 
To that unfeather'd, two-legg'd thing, a son: 
Got, while his soul did huddled notions try; 
And born a shapeless lump, like anarchy. 
In friendship false, implacable in hate: 
Resolv'd to ruin or to rule the state. 
To compass this, the triple bond he broke; 
The pillars of the public safety shook: 
And fitted Israel for a foreign yoke. 
Then, seiz'd with fear, yet still affecting fame, 
Usurp'd a patriot's all-atoning name. 
So easy still it proves in factious times, 
With public zeal to cancel private crimes: 
How safe is treason, and how sacred ill, 
Where none can sin against the people's will: 
Where crowds can wink; and no offence be known, 
Since in another's guilt they find their own. 
Yet, fame deserv'd, no enemy can grudge; 
The statesman we abhor, but praise the judge. 
In Jewish courts ne'er sat an Abbethdin 
With more discerning eyes, or hands more clean: 
Unbrib'd, unsought, the wretched to redress; 
Swift of dispatch, and easy of access. 
Oh, had he been content to serve the crown, 
With virtues only proper to the gown; 
Or, had the rankness of the soil been freed 
From cockle, that opprest the noble seed: 
David, for him his tuneful harp had strung, 
And heav'n had wanted one immortal song. 
But wild ambition loves to slide, not stand; 
And fortune's ice prefers to virtue's land: 
Achitophel, grown weary to possess 
A lawful fame, and lazy happiness; 
Disdain'd the golden fruit to gather free, 
And lent the crowd his arm to shake the tree. 
Now, manifest of crimes, contriv'd long since, 
He stood at bold defiance with his prince: 
Held up the buckler of the people's cause, 
Against the crown; and skulk'd behind the laws. 
The wish'd occasion of the plot he takes; 
Some circumstances finds, but more he makes. 
By buzzing emissaries, fills the ears 
Of list'ning crowds, with jealousies and fears 
Of arbitrary counsels brought to light, 
And proves the king himself a Jebusite. 
Weak arguments! which yet he knew full well, 
Were strong with people easy to rebel. 
For, govern'd by the moon, the giddy Jews 
Tread the same track when she the prime renews: 
And once in twenty years, their scribes record, 
By natural instinct they change their lord. 
Achitophel still wants a chief, and none 
Was found so fit as warlike Absalom: 
Not, that he wish'd his greatness to create, 
(For politicians neither love nor hate:) 
But, for he knew, his title not allow'd, 
Would keep him still depending on the crowd: 
That kingly pow'r, thus ebbing out, might be 
Drawn to the dregs of a democracy. 
Him he attempts, with studied arts to please, 
And sheds his venom, in such words as these. 

Auspicious Prince! at whose nativity 
Some royal planet rul'd the southern sky; 
Thy longing country's darling and desire; 
Their cloudy pillar, and their guardian fire: 
Their second Moses, whose extended wand 
Divides the seas, and shows the promis'd land: 
Whose dawning day, in very distant age, 
Has exercis'd the sacred prophet's rage: 
The people's pray'r, the glad diviner's theme, 
The young men's vision, and the old men's dream! 
Thee, Saviour, thee, the nation's vows confess; 
And, never satisfi'd with seeing, bless: 
Swift, unbespoken pomps, thy steps proclaim, 
And stammering babes are taught to lisp thy name. 
How long wilt thou the general joy detain; 
Starve, and defraud the people of thy reign? 
Content ingloriously to pass thy days 
Like one of virtue's fools that feeds on praise; 
Till thy fresh glories, which now shine so bright, 
Grow stale and tarnish with our daily sight. 
Believe me, royal youth, thy fruit must be, 
Or gather'd ripe, or rot upon the tree. 
Heav'n has to all allotted, soon or late, 
Some lucky revolution of their fate: 
Whose motions if we watch and guide with skill, 
(For human good depends on human will,) 
Our fortune rolls, as from a smooth descent, 
And, from the first impression, takes the bent: 
But, if unseiz'd, she glides away like wind; 
And leaves repenting folly far behind. 
Now, now she meets you, with a glorious prize, 
And spreads her locks before her as she flies. 
Had thus Old David, from whose loins you spring, 
Not dar'd, when fortune call'd him, to be king. 
At Gath an exile he might still remain; 
And Heaven's anointing oil had been in vain. 
Let his successful youth your hopes engage; 
But shun th'example of declining age: 
Behold him setting in his western skies, 
The shadows lengthening as the vapours rise. 
He is not now, as when on Jordan's sand 
The joyful people throng'd to see him land, 
Cov'ring the beach, and black'ning all the strand: 
But, like the Prince of Angels from his height, 
Comes tumbling downward with diminish'd light: 
Betray'd by one poor plot to public scorn: 
(Our only blessing since his curst return:) 
Those heaps of people which one sheaf did bind, 
Blown off, and scatter'd by a puff of wind. 
What strength can he to your designs oppose, 
Naked of friends and round beset with foes? 
If Pharaoh's doubtful succour he should use, 
A foreign aid would more incense the Jews: 
Proud Egypt would dissembled friendship bring; 
Foment the war, but not support the king: 
Nor would the royal party e'er unite 
With Pharaoh's arms, t'assist the Jebusite; 
Or if they should, their interest soon would break, 
And with such odious aid, make David weak. 
All sorts of men, by my successful arts, 
Abhorring kings, estrange their alter'd hearts 
From David's rule: And 'tis the general Cry, 
Religion, Common-wealth, and Liberty. 
If, you, as champion of the public good, 
Add to their arms a chief of royal blood; 
What may not Israel hope, and what applause 
Might such a general gain by such a cause? 
Not barren praise alone, that gaudy flow'r, 
Fair only to the sight, but solid pow'r: 
And nobler is a limited command, 
Giv'n by the love of all your native land, 
Than a successive title, long, and dark, 
Drawn from the mouldy rolls of Noah's Ark. 

What cannot praise effect in mighty minds, 
When flattery soothes, and when ambition blinds! 
Desire of pow'r, on earth a vicious weed, 
Yet, sprung from high, is of celestial seed: 
In God 'tis glory: And when men aspire, 
'Tis but a spark too much of heavenly fire. 
Th' ambitious youth, too covetous of fame, 
Too full of angel's metal in his frame; 
Unwarily was led from virtue's ways; 
Made drunk with honour, and debauch'd with praise. 
Half loath, and half consenting to the ill, 
(For loyal blood within him struggled still) 
He thus repli'd.And what pretence have I 
To take up arms for public liberty? 
My Father governs with unquestion'd right; 
The Faith's defender, and mankind's delight: 
Good, gracious, just, observant of the laws; 
And Heav'n by wonders has espous'd his cause. 
Whom has he wrong'd in all his peaceful reign? 
Who sues for justice to his throne in vain? 
What millions has he pardon'd of his foes, 
Whom just revenge did to his wrath expose? 
Mild, easy, humble, studious of our good; 
Inclin'd to mercy, and averse from blood. 
If mildness ill with stubborn Israel suit, 
His crime is God's beloved attribute. 
What could he gain, his people to betray, 
Or change his right, for arbitrary sway? 
Let haughty Pharaoh curse with such a reign, 
His fruitful Nile, and yoke a servile train. 
If David's rule Jerusalem displease, 
The Dog-star heats their brains to this disease. 
Why then should I, encouraging the bad, 
Turn rebel, and run popularly mad? 
Were he a tyrant who, by lawless might, 
Oppress'd the Jews, and rais'd the Jebusite, 
Well might I mourn; but nature's holy bands 
Would curb my spirits, and restrain my hands: 
The people might assert their liberty; 
But what was right in them, were crime in me. 
His favour leaves me nothing to require; 
Prevents my wishes, and out-runs desire. 
What more can I expect while David lives? 
All but his kingly diadem he gives: 
And that: but there he paus'd; then sighing, said, 
Is justly destin'd for a worthier head. 
For when my father from his toils shall rest, 
And late augment the number of the blest: 
His lawful issue shall the throne ascend; 
Or the collat'ral line where that shall end. 
His brother, though oppress'd with vulgar spite, 
Yet dauntless and secure of native right, 
Of every royal virtue stands possess'd; 
Still dear to all the bravest, and the best. 
His courage foes, his friends his truth proclaim; 
His loyalty the king, the world his fame. 
His mercy ev'n th'offending crowd will find: 
For sure he comes of a forgiving kind. 
Why should I then repine at Heaven's decree; 
Which gives me no pretence to royalty? 
Yet oh that Fate, propitiously inclin'd, 
Had rais'd my birth, or had debas'd my mind; 
To my large soul, not all her treasure lent, 
And then betray'd it to a mean descent. 
I find, I find my mounting spirits bold, 
And David's part disdains my mother's mold. 
Why am I scanted by a niggard-birth? 
My soul disclaims the kindred of her earth: 
And made for empire, whispers me within; 
Desire of greatness is a god-like sin. 

Him staggering so when Hell's dire agent found, 
While fainting virtue scarce maintain'd her ground, 
He pours fresh forces in, and thus replies: 

Th'eternal God, supremely good and wise, 
Imparts not these prodigious gifts in vain; 
What wonders are reserv'd to bless your reign? 
Against your will your arguments have shown, 
Such virtue's only giv'n to guide a throne. 
Not that your father's mildness I contemn; 
But manly force becomes the diadem. 
'Tis true, he grants the people all they crave; 
And more perhaps than subjects ought to have: 
For lavish grants suppose a monarch tame, 
And more his goodness than his wit proclaim. 
But when should people strive their bonds to break, 
If not when kings are negligent or weak? 
Let him give on till he can give no more, 
The thrifty Sanhedrin shall keep him poor: 
And every shekel which he can receive, 
Shall cost a limb of his prerogative. 
To ply him with new plots, shall be my care; 
Or plunge him deep in some expensive war; 
Which, when his treasure can no more supply, 
He must, with the remains of kingship, buy. 
His faithful friends, our jealousies and fears 
Call Jebusites; and Pharaoh's pensioners: 
Whom, when our fury from his aid has torn, 
He shall be naked left to public scorn. 
The next successor, whom I fear and hate, 
My arts have made obnoxious to the state; 
Turn'd all his virtues to his overthrow, 
And gain'd our elders to pronounce a foe. 
His right, for sums of necessary gold, 
Shall first be pawn'd, and afterwards be sold: 
Till time shall ever-wanting David draw, 
To pass your doubtful title into law: 
If not; the people have a right supreme 
To make their kings; for kings are made for them. 
All empire is no more than pow'r in trust: 
Which when resum'd, can be no longer just. 
Succession, for the general good design'd, 
In its own wrong a nation cannot bind: 
If altering that, the people can relieve, 
Better one suffer, than a nation grieve. 
The Jews well know their pow'r: ere Saul they chose, 
God was their king, and God they durst depose. 
Urge now your piety, your filial name, 
A father's right, and fear of future fame; 
The public good, the universal call, 
To which even Heav'n submitted, answers all. 
Nor let his love enchant your generous mind; 
'Tis Nature's trick to propagate her kind. 
Our fond begetters, who would never die, 
Love but themselves in their posterity. 
Or let his kindness by th'effects be tri'd, 
Or let him lay his vain pretence aside. 
God said he lov'd your father; could he bring 
A better proof, than to anoint him king? 
It surely show'd he lov'd the shepherd well, 
Who gave so fair a flock as Israel. 
Would David have you thought his darling son? 
What means he then, to alienate the crown? 
The name of godly he may blush to bear: 
'Tis after God's own heart to cheat his heir. 
He to his brother gives supreme command; 
To you a legacy of barren land: 
Perhaps th'old harp, on which he thrums his lays: 
Or some dull Hebrew ballad in your praise. 
Then the next heir, a prince, severe and wise 
Already looks on you with jealous eyes; 
Sees through the thin disguises of your arts, 
And marks your progress in the people's hearts. 
Though now his mighty soul in grief contains, 
He meditates revenge who least complains; 
And like a lion, slumb'ring in the way, 
Or sleep-dissembling, while he waits his prey, 
His fearless foes within his distance draws; 
Constrains his roaring and contracts his paws: 
Till at the last, his time for fury found, 
He shoots with sudden vengeance from the ground: 
The prostrate vulgar, passes o'er, and spares; 
But with a lordly rage, his hunters tears. 
Your case no tame expedients will afford; 
Resolve on death, or conquest by the sword, 
Which for no less a stake than life, you draw; 
And self-defence is Nature's eldest law. 
Leave the warm people no considering time; 
For then rebellion may be thought a crime. 
Prevail yourself of what occasion gives, 
But try your title while your father lives: 
And that your arms may have a fair pretence, 
Proclaim, you take them in the king's defence: 
Whose sacred life each minute would expose 
To plots from seeming friends and secret foes. 
And who can sound the depth of David's soul? 
Perhaps his fear, his kindness may control. 
He fears his brother, though he loves his son, 
For plighted vows too late to be undone. 
If so, by force he wishes to be gain'd; 
Like women's lechery, to seem constrain'd: 
Doubt not; but when he most affects the frown, 
Commit a pleasing rape upon the crown. 
Secure his person to secure your cause; 
They who possess the prince, possess the laws. 

He said, and this advice above the rest 
With Absalom's mild nature suited best; 
Unblam'd of life, (ambition set aside,) 
Not stain'd with cruelty, nor puff'd with pride. 
How happy had he been, if destiny 
Had higher plac'd his birth, or not so high! 
His kingly virtues might have claim'd a throne; 
And blest all other countries but his own: 
But charming greatness since so few refuse, 
'Tis juster to lament him, than accuse. 
Strong were his hopes a rival to remove, 
With blandishments to gain the public love; 
To head the faction while their zeal was hot, 
And popularly prosecute the plot. 
To farther this Achitophel unites 
The malcontents of all the Israelites: 
Whose differing parties he could wisely join, 
For several ends, to serve the same design. 
The best, and of the princes some were such, 
Who thought the pow'r of monarchy too much: 
Mistaken men, and patriots in their hearts; 
Not wicked, but seduc'd by impious arts. 
By these the springs of property were bent, 
And wound so high, they crack'd the government. 
The next for interest sought t'embroil the state, 
To sell their duty at a dearer rate; 
And make their Jewish markets of the throne; 
Pretending public good, to serve their own. 
Others thought kings an useless heavy load, 
Who cost too much, and did too little good. 
These were for laying honest David by, 
On principles of pure good husbandry. 
With them join'd all th'haranguers of the throng, 
That thought to get preferment by the tongue. 
Who follow next, a double danger bring, 
Not only hating David, but the king; 
The Solymaean rout; well vers'd of old 
In godly faction, and in treason bold; 
Cow'ring and quaking at a conqu'ror's sword, 
But lofty to a lawful prince restor'd; 
Saw with disdain an Ethnic plot begun, 
And scorn'd by Jebusites to be out-done. 
Hot Levites headed these; who pull'd before 
From th'Ark, which in the Judges' days they bore, 
Resum'd their Cant, and with a zealous cry, 
Pursu'd their old belov'd Theocracy. 
Where Sanhedrin and Priest enslav'd the nation, 
And justifi'd their spoils by inspiration: 
For who so fit for reign as Aaron's race, 
If once dominion they could found in Grace? 
These led the pack; though not of surest scent, 
Yet deepest mouth'd against the government. 
A numerous host of dreaming saints succeed; 
Of the true old enthusiastic breed: 
'Gainst form and order they their pow'r employ; 
Nothing to build, and all things to destroy. 
But far more numerous was the herd of such, 
Who think too little, and who talk too much. 
These, out of mere instinct, they knew not why, 
Ador'd their father's God, and property: 
And by the same blind benefit of fate, 
The Devil and the Jebusite did hate: 
Born to be saved even in their own despite; 
Because they could not help believing right. 
Such were the tools; but a whole Hydra more 
Remains, of sprouting heads too long, to score. 
Some of their chiefs were princes of the land: 
In the first rank of these did Zimri stand: 
A man so various, that he seem'd to be 
Not one, but all Mankind's Epitome. 
Stiff in opinions, always in the wrong; 
Was everything by starts, and nothing long: 
But in the course of one revolving moon, 
Was chemist, fiddler, statesman, and buffoon: 
Then all for women, painting, rhyming, drinking; 
Besides ten thousand freaks that died in thinking. 
Blest madman, who could every hour employ, 
With something new to wish, or to enjoy! 
Railing and praising were his usual themes; 
And both (to show his judgment) in extremes: 
So over violent, or over civil, 
That every man, with him, was god or devil. 
In squandering wealth was his peculiar art: 
Nothing went unrewarded, but desert. 
Beggar'd by fools, whom still he found too late: 
He had his jest, and they had his estate. 
He laugh'd himself from court; then sought relief 
By forming parties, but could ne'er be chief: 
For, spite of him, the weight of business fell 
On Absalom and wise Achitophel: 
Thus, wicked but in will, of means bereft, 
He left not faction, but of that was left. 

Titles and names 'twere tedious to rehearse 
Of lords, below the dignity of verse. 
Wits, warriors, commonwealths-men, were the best: 
Kind husbands and mere nobles all the rest. 
And, therefore in the name of dullness, be 
The well-hung Balaam and cold Caleb free. 
And canting Nadab let oblivion damn, 
Who made new porridge for the Paschal Lamb. 
Let friendship's holy band some names assure: 
Some their own worth, and some let scorn secure. 
Nor shall the rascal rabble here have place, 
Whom kings no titles gave, and God no grace: 
Not bull-faced Jonas, who could statutes draw 
To mean rebellion, and make treason law. 
But he, though bad, is follow'd by a worse, 
The wretch, who Heav'n's Anointed dar'd to curse. 
Shimei, whose youth did early promise bring 
Of zeal to God, and hatred to his king; 
Did wisely from expensive sins refrain, 
And never broke the Sabbath, but for gain: 
Nor ever was he known an oath to vent, 
Or curse, unless against the government. 
Thus, heaping wealth, by the most ready way 
Among the Jews, which was to cheat and pray; 
The city, to reward his pious hate 
Against his master, chose him magistrate: 
His hand a vare of justice did uphold; 
His neck was loaded with a chain of gold. 
During his office, treason was no crime. 
The sons of Belial had a glorious time: 
For Shimei, though not prodigal of pelf, 
Yet lov'd his wicked neighbour as himself: 
When two or three were gather'd to declaim 
Against the monarch of Jerusalem, 
Shimei was always in the midst of them. 
And, if they curst the king when he was by, 
Would rather curse, than break good company. 
If any durst his factious friends accuse, 
He pack'd a jury of dissenting Jews: 
Whose fellow-feeling, in the godly cause, 
Would free the suff'ring saint from human laws. 
For laws are only made to punish those 
Who serve the king, and to protect his foes. 
If any leisure time he had from pow'r, 
(Because 'tis sin to mis-employ an hour;) 
His bus'ness was, by writing, to persuade, 
That kings were useless, and a clog to trade: 
And, that his noble style he might refine, 
No Rechabite more shunn'd the fumes of wine. 
Chaste were his cellars; and his shrieval board 
The grossness of a city feast abhorr'd: 
His cooks, with long disuse, their trade forgot; 
Cool was his kitchen, though his brains were hot. 
Such frugal virtue malice may accuse; 
But sure 'twas necessary to the Jews: 
For towns once burnt, such magistrates require 
As dare not tempt God's providence by fire. 
With spiritual food he fed his servants well, 
But free from flesh, that made the Jews rebel: 
And Moses' laws he held in more account 
For forty days of fasting in the mount. 
To speak the rest, who better are forgot, 
Would tire a well-breath'd witness of the plot: 
Yet, Corah, thou shalt from oblivion pass; 
Erect thyself thou monumental brass: 
High as the serpent of thy metal made, 
While nations stand secure beneath thy shade. 
What though his birth were base, yet comets rise 
From earthy vapours e'er they shine in skies. 
Prodigious actions may as well be done 
By weaver's issue, as by prince's son. 
This arch-attestor, for the public good, 
By that one deed ennobles all his blood. 
Who ever ask'd the witnesses' high race, 
Whose oath with martyrdom did Stephen grace? 
Ours was a Levite, and as times went then, 
His tribe were God-almighty's gentlemen. 
Sunk were his eyes, his voice was harsh and loud, 
Sure signs he neither choleric was, nor proud: 
His long chin prov'd his wit; his saint-like grace 
A church vermilion, and a Moses' face. 
His memory, miraculously great, 
Could plots exceeding man's belief, repeat; 
Which therefore cannot be accounted lies, 
For human wit could never such devise. 
Some future truths are mingled in his book; 
But, where the witness fail'd, the Prophet spoke: 
Some things like visionary flights appear; 
The spirit caught him up, the Lord knows where: 
And gave him his rabbinical degree, 
Unknown to foreign university. 
His judgment yet his mem'ry did excel: 
Which piec'd his wondrous evidence so well: 
And suited to the temper of the times; 
Then groaning under Jebusitic crimes. 
Let Israel's foes suspect his Heav'nly call, 
And rashly judge his writ apocryphal; 
Our laws for such affronts have forfeits made: 
He takes his life, who takes away his trade. 
Were I myself in witness Corah's place, 
The wretch who did me such a dire disgrace, 
Should whet my memory, though once forgot, 
To make him an appendix of my plot. 
His zeal to Heav'n made him his prince despise, 
And load his person with indignities: 
But Zeal peculiar privilege affords, 
Indulging latitude to deeds and words. 
And Corah might for Agag's murther call, 
In terms as coarse as Samuel us'd to Saul. 
What others in his evidence did join, 
(The best that could be had for love or coin,) 
In Corah's own predicament will fall: 
For Witness is a common name to all. 

Surrounded thus with friends of every sort, 
Deluded Absalom forsakes the court: 
Impatient of high hopes, urg'd with renown, 
And fir'd with near possession of a crown: 
Th' admiring crowd are dazzled with surprise, 
And on his goodly person feed their eyes: 
His joy conceal'd, he sets himself to show; 
On each side bowing popularly low: 
His looks, his gestures, and his words he frames, 
And with familiar ease repeats their names. 
Thus, form'd by Nature, furnish'd out with arts, 
He glides unfelt into their secret hearts: 
Then, with a kind compassionating look, 
And sighs, bespeaking pity e'er he spoke: 
Few words he said; but easy those and fit: 
More slow than Hybla drops, and far more sweet. 

I mourn, my country-men, your lost estate; 
Though far unable to prevent your fate: 
Behold a banish'd man, for your dear cause 
Expos'd a prey to arbitrary laws! 
Yet oh! that I alone could be undone, 
Cut off from empire, and no more a son! 
Now all your liberties a spoil are made; 
Egypt and Tyrus intercept your trade, 
And Jebusites your sacred rites invade. 
My father, whom with reverence yet I name, 
Charm'd into ease, is careless of his fame: 
And, brib'd with petty sums of foreign gold, 
Is grown in Bathsheba's embraces old: 
Exalts his enemies, his friends destroys: 
And all his pow'r against himself employs. 
He gives, and let him give my right away: 
But why should he his own, and yours betray? 
He, only he can make the nation bleed, 
And he alone from my revenge is freed. 
Take then my tears (with that he wip'd his eyes) 
'Tis all the aid my present pow'r supplies: 
No court-informer can these arms accuse; 
These arms may sons against their fathers use; 
And, 'tis my wish, the next successor's reign 
May make no other Israelite complain. 

Youth, beauty, graceful action, seldom fail: 
But common interest always will prevail: 
And pity never ceases to be shown 
To him, who makes the people's wrongs his own. 
The crowd, (that still believe their kings oppress,) 
With lifted hands their young Messiah bless: 
Who now begins his progress to ordain; 
With chariots, horsemen, and a num'rous train: 
From East to West his glories he displays: 
And, like the sun, the Promis'd Land surveys. 
Fame runs before him, as the Morning-Star; 
And shouts of joy salute him from afar: 
Each house receives him as a guardian God; 
And consecrates the place of his abode: 
But hospitable treats did most commend 
Wise Issachar, his wealthy western friend. 
This moving court, that caught the people's eyes, 
And seem'd but pomp, did other ends disguise: 
Achitophel had form'd it, with intent 
To sound the depths, and fathom where it went, 
The people's hearts; distinguish friends from foes; 
And try their strength, before they came to blows. 
Yet all was colour'd with a smooth pretence 
Of specious love, and duty to their prince. 
Religion, and redress of grievances, 
Two names, that always cheat and always please, 
Are often urg'd; and good King David's life 
Endanger'd by a brother and a wife. 
Thus, in a pageant show, a plot is made; 
And peace itself is war in masquerade. 
Oh foolish Israel! never warn'd by ill: 
Still the same bait, and circumvented still! 
Did ever men forsake their present ease, 
In midst of health imagine a disease; 
Take pains contingent mischiefs to foresee, 
Make heirs for monarchs, and for God decree? 
What shall we think! Can people give away 
Both for themselves and sons, their native sway? 
Then they are left defenceless to the sword 
Of each unbounded arbitrary lord: 
And laws are vain, by which we right enjoy, 
If kings unquestion'd can those laws destroy. 
Yet, if the crowd be judge of fit and just, 
And kings are only officers in trust, 
Then this resuming cov'nant was declar'd 
When Kings were made, or is for ever bar'd: 
If those who gave the sceptre could not tie 
By their own deed their own posterity, 
How then could Adam bind his future race? 
How could his forfeit on mankind take place? 
Or how could heavenly justice damn us all, 
Who ne'er consented to our father's fall? 
Then kings are slaves to those whom they command, 
And tenants to their people's pleasure stand. 
Add, that the pow'r for property allow'd, 
Is mischievously seated in the crowd: 
For who can be secure of private right, 
If sovereign sway may be dissolv'd by might? 
Nor is the people's judgment always true: 
The most may err as grossly as the few. 
And faultless kings run down, by common cry, 
For vice, oppression and for tyranny. 
What standard is there in a fickle rout, 
Which, flowing to the mark, runs faster out? 
Nor only crowds, but Sanhedrins may be 
Infected with this public lunacy: 
And share the madness of rebellious times, 
To murther monarchs for imagin'd crimes. 
If they may give and take whene'er they please, 
Not kings alone, (the godhead's images,) 
But government itself at length must fall 
To nature's state, where all have right to all. 
Yet, grant our lords the people kings can make, 
What prudent men a settled throne would shake? 
For whatsoe'er their sufferings were before, 
That change they covet makes them suffer more. 
All other errors but disturb a state; 
But innovation is the blow of fate. 
If ancient fabrics nod, and threat to fall, 
To patch the flaws, and buttress up the wall, 
Thus far 'tis duty; but here fix the mark: 
For all beyond it is to touch our Ark. 
To change foundations, cast the frame anew, 
Is work for rebels who base ends pursue: 
At once divine and human laws control; 
And mend the parts by ruin of the whole. 
The tamp'ring world is subject to this curse, 
To physic their disease into a worse. 

Now what relief can righteous David bring? 
How fatal 'tis to be too good a king! 
Friends he has few, so high the madness grows; 
Who dare be such, must be the people's foes: 
Yet some there were, ev'n in the worst of days; 
Some let me name, and naming is to praise. 

In this short file Barzillai first appears; 
Barzillai crown'd with honour and with years: 
Long since, the rising rebels he withstood 
In regions waste, beyond the Jordan's flood: 
Unfortunately brave to buoy the state; 
But sinking underneath his master's fate: 
In exile with his god-like prince he mourn'd: 
For him he suffer'd, and with him return'd. 
The court he practis'd, not the courtier's art: 
Large was his wealth, but larger was his heart: 
Which well the noblest objects knew to choose, 
The fighting warrior, and recording Muse. 
His bed could once a fruitful issue boast: 
Now more than half a father's name is lost. 
His eldest hope, with every grace adorn'd, 
By me (so Heav'n will have it) always mourn'd, 
And always honour'd, snatch'd in manhood's prime 
B' unequal Fates, and Providence's crime: 
Yet not before the goal of honour won, 
All parts fulfill'd, of subject and of son; 
Swift was the race, but short the time to run. 
Oh narrow circle, but of pow'r divine, 
Scanted in space, but perfect in thy line! 
By sea, by land, thy matchless worth was known; 
Arms thy delight, and war was all thy own: 
Thy force infus'd, the fainting Tyrians propp'd: 
And haughty Pharaoh found his fortune stopp'd. 
Oh ancient honour, Oh unconquer'd Hand, 
Whom foes unpunish'd never could withstand! 
But Israel was unworthy of thy name: 
Short is the date of all immoderate fame. 
It looks as Heav'n our ruin had design'd, 
And durst not trust thy fortune and thy mind. 
Now, free from earth, thy disencumber'd Soul 
Mounts up, and leaves behind the clouds and starry pole: 
From thence thy kindred legions may'st thou bring, 
To aid the Guardian Angel of thy king. 
Here stop my Muse, here cease thy painful flight; 
No pinions can pursue immortal height: 
Tell good Barzillai thou canst sing no more, 
And tell thy soul she should have fled before; 
Or fled she with his life, and left this verse 
To hang on her departed patron's hearse? 
Now take thy steepy flight from Heav'n, and see 
If thou canst find on earth another he; 
Another he would be too hard to find, 
See then whom thou canst see not far behind. 
Zadoc the priest whom, shunning, pow'r and place, 
His lowly mind advanc'd to David's grace: 
With him the Sagan of Jerusalem, 
Of hospitable soul and noble stem; 
Him of the western dome, whose weighty sense 
Flows in fit words and heavenly eloquence. 
The Prophet's sons by such example led, 
To learning and to loyalty were bred: 
For colleges on bounteous kings depend, 
And never rebel was to arts a friend. 
To these succeed the pillars of the laws, 
Who best could plead, and best can judge a cause. 
Next them a train of loyal peers ascend: 
Sharp judging Adriel, the Muse's friend, 
Himself a Muse:in Sanhedrin's debate 
True to his prince; but not a slave of state. 
Whom David's love with honours did adorn, 
That from his disobedient son were torn. 
Jotham of piercing wit and pregnant thought, 
Endow'd by Nature, and by learning taught 
To move assemblies, who but only tri'd 
The worse awhile, then chose the better side; 
Nor chose alone, but turn'd the balance too; 
So much the weight of one brave man can do. 
Hushai, the friend of David in distress, 
In public storms of manly steadfastness; 
By foreign treaties he inform'd his youth; 
And join'd experience to his native truth. 
His frugal care suppli'd the wanting throne; 
Frugal for that, but bounteous of his own: 
'Tis easy conduct when exchequers flow; 
But hard the task to manage well the low: 
For sovereign power is too depress'd or high, 
When kings are forc'd to sell, or crowds to buy. 
Indulge one labour more, my weary Muse, 
For Amiel, who can Amiel's praise refuse? 
Of ancient race by birth, but nobler yet 
In his own worth, and without title great: 
The Sanhedrin long time as chief he rul'd, 
Their reason guided, and their passion cool'd; 
So dext'rous was he in the crown's defence, 
So form'd to speak a loyal nation's sense, 
That as their band was Israel's tribes in small, 
So fit was he to represent them all. 
Now rasher charioteers the seat ascend, 
Whose loose careers his steady skill commend: 
They, like th'unequal ruler of the day, 
Misguide the seasons and mistake the way; 
While he withdrawn at their mad labour smiles, 
And safe enjoys the sabbath of his toils. 

These were the chief; a small but faithful band 
Of worthies, in the breach who dar'd to stand, 
And tempt th'united fury of the land. 
With grief they view'd such powerful engines bent, 
To batter down the lawful government. 
A numerous faction with pretended frights, 
In Sanhedrins to plume the regal rights. 
The true successor from the court remov'd: 
The plot, by hireling witnesses, improv'd. 
These ills they saw, and as their duty bound, 
They show'd the king the danger of the wound: 
That no concessions from the throne would please; 
But lenitives fomented the disease: 
That Absalom, ambitious of the crown, 
Was made the lure to draw the people down: 
That false Achitophel's pernicious hate, 
Had turn'd the plot to ruin church and state: 
The Council violent, the rabble worse: 
That Shimei taught Jerusalem to curse. 

With all these loads of injuries opprest, 
And long revolving in his careful breast 
Th'event of things; at last his patience tir'd, 
Thus from his royal throne, by Heav'n inspir'd, 
The god-like David spoke; and awful fear 
His train their Maker in their Master hear. 

Thus long have I by native mercy sway'd, 
My wrongs dissembl'd, my revenge delay'd: 
So willing to forgive th'offending age; 
So much the father did the king assuage. 
But now so far my clemency they slight, 
Th' offenders question my forgiving right. 
That one was made for many, they contend: 
But 'tis to rule, for that's a monarch's end. 
They call my tenderness of blood, my fear: 
Though manly tempers can the longest bear. 
Yet, since they will divert my native course, 
'Tis time to shew I am not good by force. 
Those heap'd affronts that haughty subjects bring, 
Are burdens for a camel, not a king: 
Kings are the public pillars of the state, 
Born to sustain and prop the nation's weight: 
If my young Sampson will pretend a call 
To shake the column, let him share the fall: 
But oh that yet he would repent and live! 
How easy 'tis for parents to forgive! 
With how few tears a pardon might be won 
From Nature, pleading for a darling son! 
Poor pitied youth, by my paternal care, 
Rais'd up to all the heights his frame could bear: 
Had God ordain'd his fate for empire born, 
He would have giv'n his soul another turn: 
Gull'd with a patriot's name, whose modern sense 
Is one that would by law supplant his prince: 
The people's brave, the politician's tool; 
Never was patriot yet, but was a fool. 
Whence comes it that religion and the laws 
Should more be Absalom's than David's cause? 
His old instructor, e'er he lost his place, 
Was never thought endued with so much grace. 
Good heav'ns, how faction can a patriot paint! 
My rebel ever proves my people's saint; 
Would they impose an heir upon the throne? 
Let Sanhedrins be taught to give their own. 
A king's at least a part of government; 
And mine as requisite as their consent: 
Without my leave a future king to choose, 
Infers a right the present to depose; 
True, they petition me t'approve their choice: 
But Esau's hands suit ill with Jacob's voice. 
My pious subjects for my safety pray, 
Which to secure they take my pow'r away. 
From plots and treasons Heav'n preserve my years 
But save me most from my petitioners. 
Unsatiate as the barren womb or grave; 
God cannot grant so much as they can crave. 
What then is left but with a jealous eye 
To guard the small remains of royalty? 
The law shall still direct my peaceful sway, 
And the same law teach rebels to obey: 
Votes shall no more establish'd pow'r control, 
Such votes as make a part exceed the whole: 
No groundless clamours shall my friends remove, 
Nor crowds have pow'r to punish ere they prove: 
For gods, and god-like kings their care express, 
Still to defend their servants in distress. 
Oh that my pow'r to saving were confin'd: 
Why am I forc'd, like Heav'n, against my mind, 
To make examples of another kind? 
Must I at length the sword of justice draw? 
Oh curst effects of necessary law! 
How ill my fear they by my mercy scan, 
Beware the fury of a patient man. 
Law they require, let law then show her face; 
They could not be content to look on grace, 
Her hinder parts, but with a daring eye 
To tempt the terror of her front, and die. 
By their own arts 'tis righteously decreed, 
Those dire artificers of death shall bleed. 
Against themselves their witnesses will swear, 
Till viper-like their mother plot they tear: 
And suck for nutriment that bloody gore 
Which was their principle of life before. 
Their Belial with the Belzebub will fight; 
Thus on my foes, my foes shall do me right: 

Nor doubt th'event: for factious crowds engage 
In their first onset, all their brutal rage; 
Then, let 'em take an unresisted course: 
Retire and traverse, and delude their force: 
But when they stand all breathless, urge the fight, 
And rise upon 'em with redoubled might: 
For lawful pow'r is still superior found, 
When long driv'n back, at length it stands the ground. 

He said. Th' Almighty, nodding, gave consent; 
And peals of thunder shook the firmament. 
Henceforth a series of new time began, 
The mighty years in long procession ran: 
Once more the god-like David was restor'd, 
And willing nations knew their lawful lord.

**
The Medal
***

Of all our antic sights and pageantry
Which English idiots run in crowds to see,
The Polish Medal bears the prize alone;
A monster, more the favourite of the town
Than either fairs or theatres have shown.
Never did art so well with nature strive,
Nor ever idol seemed so much alive;
So like the man, so golden to the sight,
So base within, so counterfeit and light.
One side is filled with title and with face;
And, lest the king should want a regal place,
On the reverse a tower the town surveys,
O'er which our mounting sun his beams displays.
The word, pronounced aloud by shrieval voice,
Loetamur, which in Polish is Rejoice,
The day, month, year, to the great act are joined,
And a new canting holiday designed.
Five days he sate for every cast and look,
Four more days than God to finish Adam took.
But who can tell what essence angels are
Or how long Heaven was making Lucifer?
Oh, could the style that copied every grace
And ploughed such furrows for an eunuch face,
Could it have formed his ever-changing will,
The various piece had tired the graver's skill!
A martial hero first, with early care
Blown, like a pigmy by the winds, to war;
A beardless chief, a rebel ere a man,
So young his hatred to his Prince began.
Next this, (how wildly will ambition steer!)
A vermin wriggling in the usurper's ear,
Bartering his venal wit for sums of gold,
He cast himself into the saint-like mould;
Groaned, sighed, and prayed, while godliness was gain,
The loudest bag-pipe of the squeaking train.
But, as 'tis hard to cheat a juggler's eyes,
His open lewdness he could ne'er disguise.
There split the saint; for hypocritic zeal
Allows no sins but those it can conceal.
Whoring to scandal gives too large a scope;
Saints must not trade, but they may interlope.
The ungodly principle was all the same;
But a gross cheat betrays his partners' game.
Besides, their pace was formal, grave, and slack;
His nimble wit outran the heavy pack.
Yet still he found hs fortune at a stay,
Whole droves of blockheads choking up his way;
They took, but not rewarded, his advice;
Villain and wit exact a double price.
Power was his aim; but thrown from that pretence,
The wretch turned loyal in his own defence,
And malice reconciled him to his Prince.
Him in the anguish of his soul he served,
Rewarded faster still than he deserved.
Behold him now exalted into trust,
His counsels oft convenient, seldom just;
Even in the most sincere advice he gave
He had a grudging still to be a knave.
The frauds he learnt in his fanatic years
Made him uneasy in his lawful gears.
At best, as little honest as he could,
And, like white witches, mischievously good.
To his first bias longingly he leans
And rather would be great by wicked means.
Thus framed for ill, he loosed our triple hold,
(Advice unsafe, precipitous, and bold.)
From hence those tears, that Ilium was our woe:
Who helps a powerful friend forearms a foe.
What wonder if the waves prevail so far,
When he cut down the banks that made the bar?
Seas follow but their nature to invade;
But he by art our native strength betrayed.
So Samson to his foe his force confest,
And to be shorn lay slumbering on her breast.
But when this fatal counsel, found too late,
Exposed its author to the public hate,
When his just sovereign by no impious way
Could be seduced to arbitrary sway,
Forsaken of that hope, he shifts his sail,
Drives down the current with the popular gale,
And shows the fiend confessed without a veil.
He preaches to the crowd that power is lent,
But not conveyed to kingly government,
That claims successive bear no binding force,
That coronation oaths are things of course;
Maintains the multitude can never err,
And sets the people in the papal chair.
The reason's obvious, interest never lies;
The most have still their interest in their eyes,
The power is always theirs, and power is ever wise.
Almighty crowd! thou shortenest all dispute.
Power is thy essence, wit thy attribute!
Nor faith nor reason make thee at a stay,
Thou leapst o'er all eternal truths in thy Pindaric way!
Athens, no doubt, did righteously decide,
When Phocion and when Socrates were tried;
As righteously they did those dooms repent;
Still they were wise, whatever way they went.
Crowds err not, though to both extremes they run;
To kill the father and recall the son.
Some think the fools were most, as times went then,
But now the world's o'erstocked with prudent men.
The common cry is even religion's test;
The Turk's is at Constantinople best,
Idols in India, Popery in Rome,
And our own worship is only true at home,
And true but for the time; 'tis hard to know
How long we please it shall continue so;
This side to-day, and that to-morrow burns;
So all are God Almighties in their turns.
A tempting doctrine, plausible and new;
What fools our fathers were, if this be true!
Who, to destroy the seeds of civil war,
Inherent right in monarchs did declare;
And, that a lawful power might never cease,
Secured succession to secure our peace.
Thus property and sovereign sway at last
In equal balances were justly cast;
But this new Jehu spurs the hot-mounted horse,
Instructs the beast to know his native force,
To take the bit between his teeth and fly
To the next headlong steep of anarchy.
Too happy Engand, if our good we knew,
Would we possess the freedom we pursue!
The lavish government can give no more;
Yet we repine, and plenty makes us poor.
God tried us once; our rebel fathers fought;
He glutted them with all the power they sought,
Till, mastered by their own usurping brave,
The free-born subject sunk into a slave.
We loathe our manna, and we long for quails;
Ah! what is man, when his own wish prevails!
How rash, how swift to plunge himself in ill,
Proud of his power and boundless in his will!
That kings can do no wrong we must believe;
None can they do, and must they all receive?
Help. Heaven, or sadly we shall see an hour
When neither wrong nor right are in their power!
Already they have lost their best defence,
The benefit of laws which they dispense.
No justice to their righteous cause allowed,
But baffled by an arbitrary crowd;
And medals graved, their conquest to record,
The stamp and coin of their adopted lord.
The man who laughed but once, to see an ass
Mumbling to make the cross-grained thistles pass,
Might laugh again to see a jury chaw
The prickles of unpalatable law.
The witnesses that, leech-like lived on blood,
Sucking for them were med'cinally good;
But when they fastened on their festered sore,
Then justice and religion they forswore,
Thus men are raised by factions and decried,
And rogue and saint distinguished by their side;
They rack even Scripture to confess their cause
And plead a call to preach in spite of laws.
But that's no news to the poor injured page,
It has been used as ill in every age,
And is constrained with patience all to take,
For what defence can Greek and Hebrew make?
Happy who can this talking trumpet seize,
They make it speak whatever sense they please!
'Twas framed at first our oracle to inquire;
But since our sects in prophecy grow higher,
The text inspires not them, but they the text inspire.
London, thou great emporium of our isle,
O thou too bounteous, thou too fruitful Nile!
How shall I praise or curse to thy desert,
Or separate thy sound from thy corrupted part?
I called thee Nile; the parallel will stand:
Thy tides of wealth o'erflow the fattened land;
Yet monsters from thy large increase we find
Engendered on the slime thou leavest behind.
Sedition has not wholly seized on thee,
Thy nobler parts are from infection free.
Of Israel's tribes thou hast a numerous band,
But still the Canaanite is in the land.
Thy military chiefs are brave and true,
Nor are thy disenchanted burghers few.
The head is loyal which thy heart commands,
But what's a head with two such gouty hands?
The wise and wealthy love the surest way
And are content to thrive and to obey.
But wisdom is to sloth too great a slave;
None are so busy as the fool and knave.
Those let me curse; what vengeance will they urge,
Whose ordures neither plague nor fire can purge,
Nor sharp experience can to duty bring
Nor angry Heaven nor a forgiving king!
In gospel-phrase their chapmen they betray;
Their shops are dens, the buyer is their prey;
The knack of trades is living on the spoil;
They boast e'en when each other they beguile.
Customs to steal is such a trivial thing
That 'tis their charter to defraud their King.
All hands unite of every jarring sect;
They cheat the country first, and then infect.
They for God's cause their monarchs dare dethrone,
And they'll be sure to make His cause their own.
Whether the plotting Jesuit laid the plan
Of murdering kings, or the French Puritan,
Our sacrilegious sects their guides outgo
And kings and kingly power would murder too.
What means their traitorous combination less,
Too plain to evade, too shameful to confess?
But treason is not owned when 'tis descried;
Successful crimes alone are justified.
The men who no consiracy would find,
Who doubts but, had it taken, they had joined?
Joined in a mutual covenant of defence,
At first without, at last against their Prince?
If sovereign right by sovereign power they scan,
The same bold maxim holds in God and man:
God were not safe; his thunder could they shun,
He should be forced to crown another son.
Thus, when the heir was from the vineyard thrown,
The rich possession was the murderers' own.
In vain to sophistry they have recourse;
By proving theirs no plot they prove 'tis worse,
Unmasked rebellion, and audiacious force,
Which, though not actual, yet all eyes may see
'Tis working, in the immediate power to be;
For from pretended grievances they rise
First to dislike and after to dispise;
Then, Cyclop-like, in human flesh to deal,
Chop up a minister at every meal;
Perhaps not wholly to melt down the king,
But clip his regal rights within the ring;
From thence to asssume the power of peace and war
And ease him by degrees of public care.
Yet, to consult his dignity and fame,
He should have leave to exercise the name,
And hold the cards while Commons played the game.
For what can power give more than food and drink,
To live at ease and not be bound to think?
These are the cooler methods of their crime,
But their hot zealots think 'tis loss of time;
On utmost bounds of loyalty they stand,
And grin and whet like a Croatian band
That waits impatient for the last command:
Thus outlaws open villainy maintain;
They steal not, but in squadrons scour the plain;
And if their power the passengers subdue,
The most most have right, the wrong is in the few.
Such impious axioms foolishly they show,
For in some soils Republics will not grow:
Our temperate Isle will no extremes sustain
Of popular sway or arbitrary reign:
But slides between them both into the best,
Secure in freedom, in a monarch blest.
And, though the climate, vexed with various winds,
Works through our yielding bodies on our minds,
The wholesome tempest purges what it breeds
To recommend the calmness that succeeds.
But thou, the pander of the people's hearts,
(O crooked soul and serpentine in arts!)...
What curses on thy blasted name will fall,
Which age to age their legacy shall call,
For all must curse the woes that must descend on all!
Religion thou hast none: thy mercury
Has passed through every sect, or theirs through thee.
But what thou givest, that venom still remains,
And the poxed nation feels thee in their brains.
What else inspires the tongues and swells the breasts
Of all thy bellowing renegado priests,
That preach up thee for God, dispense thy laws,
And with thy stum ferment their fainting cause,
Fresh fumes of madness raise, and toil and sweat,
To make the formidable cripple great?
Yet should thy crimes succeed, should lawless power
Compass those ends thy greedy hopes devour,
Thy canting friends thy mortal foes would be,
Thy god and theirs will never long agree;
For thine, if thou hast any, must be one
That lets the world and human kind alone;
A jolly god that passes hours too well
To promise Heaven or threaten us with Hell,
That unconcerned can at rebellion sit
And wink at crimes he did himself commit.
A tyrant theirs; the heaven their priesthood paints
A conventicle of gloomy sullen saints;
A heaven, like Bedlam, slovenly and sad,
Foredoomed for souls with false religion mad.
Without a vision poets can foreshow
What all but fools by common sense may know:
If true succession from our Isle should fail,
And crowds profane with impious arms prevail,
Not thou nor those thy factious arts engage
Shall reap that harvest of rebellious rage,
With which thou flatterest thy decrepit age.
The swelling poison of the several sects,
Which, wanting vent, the nation's health infects,
Shall burst its bag; and fighting out their way,
The various venoms on each other prey.
The Presbyter, puffed up with spiritual pride,
Shall on the necks of the lewd nobles ride,
His brethren damn, the civil power defy,
And parcel out republic prelacy.
But short shall be his reign; his rigid yoke
And tyrant power will puny sects provoke,
And frogs, and toads, and all the tadpole train
Will croak to Heaven for help from this devouring crane.
The cut-throat sword and clamorous gown shall jar
In sharing their ill-gotten spoils of war;
Chiefs shall be grudged the part which they pretend;
Lords envy lords, and friends with every friend
About their impious merit shall contend.
The surly Commons shall respect deny
And justle peerage out with property.
Their General either shall his trust betray
And force the crowd to arbitrary sway,
Or they, suspecting his ambitious aim,
In hate of kings shall cast anew the frame
And thrust out Collatine that bore their name.
Thus inborn broils the factions would engage,
Or wars of exiled heirs, or foreign rage,
Till halting vengeance overtook our age,
And our wild labours, wearied into rest,
Reclined us on a rightful monarch's breast.

**
Religio Laici, or, A Layman's Faith
***

Dim, as the borrowd beams of Moon and Stars  
To lonely, weary, wandring Travellers 
Is Reason to the Soul: And as on high 
Those rowling Fires discover but the Sky  
Not light us here; So Reasons glimmering Ray
Was lent, not to assure our doubtfull way,  
But guide us upward to a better Day.  
And as those nightly Tapers disappear 
When Days bright Lord ascends our Hemisphere;  
So pale grows Reason at Religions sight;
So dyes, and so dissolves in Supernatural Light.  
Some few, whose Lamp shone brighter, have been led  
From Cause to Cause to Natures secret head; 
And found that one first principle must be; 
But what, or who, that UNIVERSAL HE;
Whether some Soul incompassing this Ball, 
Unmade, unmovd; yet making, moving All;  
Or various Atoms, interfering Dance  
Leapt into Form (the Noble work of Chance,) 
Or this great All was from Eternity;
Not evn the Stagirite himself could see; 
And Epicurus Guessd as well as He. 
As blindly gropd they for a future State,  
As rashly Judgd of Providence and Fate:  
But least of all could their Endeavours find
What most concernd the good of Humane kind:  
For Happiness was never to be found;  
But vanishd from em, like Enchanted ground. 
One thought Content the Good to be enjoyed: 
This, every little Accident destroyed:
The wiser Madmen did for Vertue toyl, 
A Thorny, or at best a barren Soil: 
In Pleasure some their glutton Souls would steep, 
But found their Line too short, the Well too deep,  
And leaky Vessels which no Bliss coud keep.
Thus, anxious Thoughts in endless Circles roul, 
Without a Centre where to fix the Soul: 
In this wilde Maze their vain Endeavours end: 
How can the less the Greater comprehend?  
Or finite Reason reach Infinity?
For what coud Fathom GOD were more than He.  

The Deist thinks he stands on firmer ground,  
Cries Eureka: the mighty Secrets found:  
God is that Spring of Good; Supreme and Best, 
We, made to serve, and in that Service blest;
If so, some Rules of Worship must be given, 
Distributed alike to all by Heaven: 
Else God were partial, and to some denyd 
The Means His Justice shoud for all provide. 
This general Worship is to PRAISE, and PRAY:
One part to borrow Blessings, one to pay: 
And when frail Nature slides into Offence,  
The Sacrifice for Crimes is Penitence.  
Yet, since th Effects of Providence, we find 
Are variously dispensed to Humane kind;
That Vice Triumphs and Vertue suffers here, 
(A Brand that Sovereign justice cannot bear;) 
Our Reason prompts us to a future State,  
The last Appeal from Fortune, and from Fate,  
Where Gods all-righteous ways will be declard,
The Bad meet Punishment, the Good, Reward.  

Thus Man by his own strength to Heaven woud soar:  
And woud not be Obliged to God for more. 
Vain, wretched Creature, how art thou misled  
To think thy Wit these God-like notions bred!
These Truths are not the product of thy Mind, 
But dropt from Heaven, and of a Nobler kind.  
Reveald Religion first informd thy sight, 
And Reason saw not till Faith sprung the Light. 
Hence all thy Natural Worship takes the Source:
Tis Revelation what thou thinkst Discourse.  
Else how comst Thou to see these truths so clear,  
Which so obscure to Heathens did appear?  
Not Plato these, nor Aristotle found. 
Nor He whose wisedom Oracles renownd.
Hast thou a Wit so deep, or so sublime, 
Or canst thou lower dive, or higher climb?  
Canst Thou, by Reason, more of God-head know  
Than Plutarch, Seneca, or Cicero? 
Those Gyant Wits, in happyer Ages born,
(When Arms, and Arts did Greece and Rome adorn,)  
Knew no such Systeme: no such Piles coud raise 
Of Natural Worship, built on Prayr and Praise, 
To One sole GOD:  
Nor did Remorse, to Expiate Sin, prescribe:
But slew their fellow Creatures for a Bribe:  
The guiltless Victim groand for their Offence; 
And Cruelty and Blood, was Penitence. 
If Sheep and Oxen coud Attone for Men  
Ah! at how cheap a rate the Rich might Sin!
And great Oppressours might Heavens Wrath beguile 
By offering his own Creatures for a Spoil!  

Darst thou, poor Worm, offend Infinity?  
And must the Terms of Peace be given by Thee? 
Then Thou art Justice in the last Appeal;
Thy easie God instructs Thee to rebell: 
And, like a King remote, and weak, must take  
What Satisfaction Thou art pleased to make. 

But if there be a Powr too Just, and strong  
To wink at Crimes and bear unpunishd Wrong;
Look humbly upward, see his Will disclose 
The Forfeit first, and then the Fine impose 
A Mulct thy poverty coud never pay 
Had not Eternal Wisedom found the way 
And with Clestial Wealth supplyd thy Store;
His Justice makes the Fine, his Mercy quits the Score.  
See God descending in thy Humane Frame; 
Th offended, suffering in th Offenders name:  
All thy Misdeeds to Him imputed see,  
And all his Righteousness devolvd on thee.

For granting we have Sind, and that th offence  
Of Man, is made against Omnipotence,  
Some Price, that bears proportion, must be paid 
And Infinite with Infinite be weighd.  
See then the Deist lost: Remorse for Vice
Not paid, or paid, inadequate in price: 
What farther means can Reason now direct, 
Or what Relief from humane Wit expect?  
That shews us sick; and sadly are we sure 
Still to be Sick, till Heavn reveal the Cure:
If then Heavens Will must needs be understood, 
(Which must, if we want Cure, and Heaven be Good,)  
Let all Records of Will reveald be shown;  
With Scripture, all in equal ballance thrown, 
And our one Sacred Book will be That one.

Proof needs not here; for whether we compare  
That Impious, Idle, Superstitious Ware  
Of Rites, Lustrations, Offerings, (which before,  
In various Ages, various Countries bore,) 
With Christian Faith and Vertues, we shall find
None answring the great ends of humane kind, 
But This one rule of Life; That shews us best 
How God may be appeasd, and mortals blest. 
Whether from length of Time its worth we draw,  
The World is scarce more Ancient than the Law:
Heavns early Care prescribd for every Age;  
First, in the Soul, and after, in the Page. 
Or, whether more abstractedly we look,  
Or on the Writers, or the written Book, 
Whence, but from Heavn coud men, unskilled in Arts,
In several Ages born, in several parts, 
Weave such agreeing Truths? or how or why 
Shoud all conspire to cheat us with a Lye? 
Unaskd their Pains, ungratefull their Advice,  
Starving their Gain and Martyrdom their Price.

If on the Book itself we cast our view, 
Concurrent Heathens prove the Story True: 
The Doctrine, Miracles; which must convince,  
For Heavn in Them appeals to humane Sense; 
And though they prove not, they Confirm the Cause,
When what is Taught agrees with Natures Laws. 

Then for the Style, Majestick and Divine, 
It speaks no less than God in every Line; 
Commanding words; whose Force is still the same 
As the first Fiat that producd our Frame.
All Faiths beside, or did by Arms ascend; 
Or Sense indulgd has made Mankind their Friend;  
This onely Doctrine does our Lusts oppose:  
Unfed by Natures Soil, in which it grows; 
Cross to our Interests, curbing Sense and Sin;
Oppressd without, and undermind within, 
It thrives through pain; its own Tormentours tires; 
And with a stubborn patience still aspires. 
To what can Reason such Effects assign, 
Transcending Nature, but to Laws Divine?
Which in that Sacred Volume are containd;  
Sufficient, clear, and for that use ordained. 

But stay: the Diest here will urge anew,  
No Supernatural Worship can be True:  
Because a general Law is that alone
Which must to all and every where be known: 
A Style so large as not this Book can claim,  
Nor aught that bears reveald Religions Name. 
Tis said the sound of a Messiahs Birth  
Is gone through all the habitable Earth:
But still that Text must be confind alone  
To what was Then inhabited, and known:  
And what Provision could from thence accrue 
To Indian Souls, and Worlds discovered New? 
In other parts it helps, that Ages past,
The Scriptures there were known, and were imbracd, 
Till Sin spread once again the Shades of Night: 
Whats that to these who never saw the Light? 

Of all Objections this indeed is chief  
To startle Reason, stagger frail Belief:
We grant, tis true, that Heavn from humane Sense  
Has hid the secret paths of Providence; 
But boundless Wisedom, boundless Mercy, may 
Find evn for those be-wildred Souls, a way:  
If from his Nature Foes may Pity claim,
Much more may Strangers who neer heard his Name. 
And though no Name be for Salvation known,  
But that of His Eternal Sons alone; 
Who knows how far transcending Goodness can 
Extend the Merits of that Son to Man?
Who knows what Reasons may his Mercy lead;  
Or Ignorance invincible may plead?  
Not onely Charity bids hope the best, 
But more the great Apostle has exprest: 
That, if the Gentiles, (whom no Law inspird,)
By Nature did what was by Law required, 
They, who the written Rule had never known, 
Were to themselves both Rule and Law alone: 
To Natures plain indictment they shall plead; 
And, by their Conscience, be condemnd or freed.
Most Righteous Doom! because a Rule reveald  
Is none to Those, from whom it was conceald. 
Then those who followd Reasons Dictates right; 
Livd up, and lifted high their Natural Light;  
With Socrates may see their Makers Face,
While Thousand Rubrick-Martyrs want a place.  

Nor does it baulk my Charity to find  
Th Eqyptian Bishop of another mind:  
For, though his Creed Eternal Truth contains, 
Tis hard for Man to doom to endless pains
All who believd not all, his Zeal requird;  
Unless he first coud prove he was inspird.  
Then let us either think he meant to say  
This Faith, where publishd, was the onely way; 
Or else conclude that, Arius to confute,
The good old Man, too eager in dispute, 
Flew high; and, as his Christian Fury rose, 
Damnd all for Hereticks who durst oppose.  

Thus far my Charity this path has tryd,  
(A much unskilfull, but well meaning guide:)
Yet what they are, even these crude thoughts were bred  
By reading that, which better thou hast read, 
Thy Matchless Authors work: which thou, my Friend, 
By well translating better dost commend:  
Those youthfull hours, which of thy Equals most
In Toys have squanderd, or in Vice have lost,  
Those hours hast thou to Nobler use employd; 
And the severe Delights of Truth enjoyd. 
Witness this weighty Book, in which appears 
The crabbed Toil of many thoughtfull years,
Spent by thy Authour in the Sifting Care  
Of Rabbins old Sophisticated Ware  
From Gold Divine, which he who well can sort  
May afterwards make Algebra a Sport.  
A Treasure which, if Country-Curates buy,
They Junius, and Tremellius may defy: 
Save pains in various readings, and Translations, 
And without Hebrew make most learnd quotations.  
A Work so full with various Learning fraught, 
So nicely pondred, yet so strongly wrought,
As Natures height and Arts last hand requird:  
As much as Man coud compass, uninspird. 
Where we may see what Errours have been made  
Both in the Copiers and Translaters Trade:  
How Jewish, Popish, Interests have prevaild,
And where Infallibility has faild. 

For some, who have his secret meaning ghesd, 
Have found our Authour not too much a Priest; 
For Fashion-sake he seems to have recourse  
To Pope, and Councils, and Traditions force:
But he that old Traditions coud subdue,  
Coud not but find the weakness of the New: 
If Scripture, though derivd from heavnly birth, 
Has been but carelessly preserved on Earth; 
If Gods own People, who of God before
Knew what we know, and had been promisd more,  
In fuller Terms of Heavens assisting Care, 
And who did neither Time, nor Study spare 
To keep this Book untainted, unperplext;  
Let in gross Errours to corrupt the Text,
Omitted paragraphs, embroyld the Sense,  
With vain Traditions stopt the gaping Fence,  
Which every common hand pulld up with ease:  
What Safety from such brushwood-helps as these? 
If written words from time are not securd,
How can we think have oral Sounds endurd?  
Which thus transmitted, if one Mouth has faild,  
Immortal Lyes on Ages are intaild; 
And that some such have been, is provd too plain;  
If we consider Interest, Church, and Gain.

Oh but, says one, Tradition set aside, 
Where can we hope for an unerring Guid? 
For since th original Scripture has been lost, 
All Copies disagreeing, maimd the most,  
Or Christian Faith can have no certain ground
Or Truth in Church Tradition must be found. 

Suchan Omniscient Church we wish indeed;  
Twere worth Both Testaments, and cast in the Creed: 
But if this Mother be a Guid so sure  
As can all doubts resolve, all truth secure,
Then her Infallibility, as well 
Where Copies are corrupt, or lame, can tell;  
Restore lost Canon with as little pains,  
As truly explicate what still remains:  
Which yet no Council dare pretend to doe;
Unless like Esdras, they could write it new:  
Strange Confidence, still to interpret true,  
Yet not be sure that all they have explaind, 
Is in the blest Original containd. 
More Safe, and much more modest tis to say
God woud not leave Mankind without a way:  
And that the Scriptures, though not every where 
Free from Corruption, or intire, or clear,  
Are uncorrupt, sufficient, clear, intire, 
In all things which our needfull Faith require.
If others in the same Glass better see, 
Tis for Themselves they look, but not for me:  
For MY Salvation must its Doom receive  
Not from what OTHERS, but what I believe. 

Must all Tradition then be set aside?
This to affirm were Ignorance or Pride. 
Are there not many points, some needfull sure 
To saving Faith, that Scripture leaves obscure? 
Which every Sect will wrest a several way 
(For what one Sect interprets, all Sects may:)
We hold, and say we prove from Scripture plain, 
That Christ is GOD; the bold Socinian 
From the same Scripture urges hes but MAN. 
Now what Appeal can end th important Suit; 
Both parts talk loudly, but the Rule is mute.

Shall I speak plain, and in a Nation free 
Assume an honest Laymans Liberty?  
I think (according to my little Skill,) 
To my own Mother-Church submitting still) 
That many have been savd, and many may,
Who never heard this Question brought in play.  
Th unletterd Christian, who believes in gross,  
Plods on to Heaven and neer is at a loss:  
For the Streight-gate would be made streighter yet, 
Were none admitted there but men of Wit.
The few, by Nature formd, with Learning fraught, 
Born to instruct, as others to be taught. 
Must Study well the Sacred Page; and see  
Which Doctrine, this, or that, does best agree  
With the whole Tenour of the Work Divine:
And plainlyest points to Heavens reveald Design:  
Which Exposition flows from genuine Sense;  
And which is forcd by Wit and Eloquence. 
Not that Traditions parts are useless here: 
When general, old, disinteressd and clear:
That Ancient Fathers thus expound the Page  
Gives Truth the reverend Majesty of Age,  
Confirms its force by biding every Test;  
For best Authoritys, next Rules, are best. 
And still the nearer to the Spring we go
More limpid, more unsoyld, the Waters flow.  
Thus, first Traditions were a proof alone;  
Coud we be certain such they were, so known: 
But since some Flaws in long descent may be,  
They make not Truth but Probability.
Even Arius and Pelagius durst provoke 
To what the Centuries preceding spoke.  
Such difference is there in an oft-told Tale: 
But Truth by its own Sinews will prevail. 
Tradition written therefore more commends
Authority, than what from Voice descends: 
And this, as perfect as its kind can be,  
Rouls down to us the Sacred History:  
Which, from the Universal Church receivd,  
Is tryd, and after for its self believed.

The partial Papists woud infer from hence, 
Their Church, in last resort, shoud Judge the Sense.  
But first they would assume, with wondrous Art, 
Themselves to be the whole, who are but part 
Of that vast Frame, the Church; yet grant they were
The handers down, can they from thence infer  
A right t interpret? or woud they alone 
Who brought the Present claim it for their own? 
The Books a Common Largess to Mankind; 
Not more for them than every Man designd;
The welcome News is in the Letter found;  
The Carriers not Commissiond to expound.  
It speaks it Self, and what it does contain,  
In all things needfull to be known, is plain. 

In times oergrown with Rust and Ignorance,
A gainfull Trade their Clergy did advance:  
When want of Learning kept the Laymen low,  
And none but Priests were Authorizd to know; 
When what small Knowledge was, in them did dwell; 
And he a God who coud but Reade or Spell;
Then Mother Church did mightily prevail:  
She parceld out the Bible by retail: 
But still expounded what She sold or gave;  
To keep it in her Power to Damn and Save: 
Scripture was scarce, and as the Market went,
Poor Laymen took Salvation on Content;  
As needy men take Money, good or bad: 
Gods Word they had not, but the Priests they had.  
Yet, whateer false Conveyances they made,  
The Lawyer still was certain to be paid.
In those dark times they learnd their knack so well, 
That by long use they grew Infallible:  
At last, a knowing Age began t enquire 
If they the Book, or That did them inspire: 
And, making narrower search they found, th late,
That what they thought the Priests was Their Estate, 
Taught by the Will producd, (the written Word,)  
How long they had been cheated on Record. 
Then, every man who saw the title fair, 
Claimd a Childs part, and put in for a Share:
Consulted Soberly his private good; 
And savd himself as cheap as eer he coud.  

Tis true, my Friend, (and far be Flattery hence) 
This good had full as bad a Consequence:  
The Book thus put in every vulgar hand,
Which each presumd he best coud understand, 
The Common Rule was made the common Prey; 
And at the mercy of the Rabble lay. 
The tender Page with horney Fists was gauld; 
And he was gifted most that loudest bauld;
The Spirit gave the Doctoral Degree,  
And every member of a Company 
Was of his Trade and of the Bible free. 
Plain Truths enough for needfull use they found;  
But men woud still be itching to expound;
Each was ambitious of th obscurest place,  
No measure tan from Knowledge, all from GRACE. 
Study and Pains were now no more their Care;  
Texts were explaind by Fasting and by Prayer:  
This was the Fruit the private Spirit brought;
Occasiond by great Zeal and little Thought.  
While Crouds unlearnd, with rude Devotion warm,  
About the Sacred Viands buz and swarm,  
The Fly-blown Text creates a crawling Brood;  
And turns to Maggots what was meant for Food.
A Thousand daily Sects rise up, and dye;  
A Thousand more the perishd Race supply: 
So all we make of Heavens discoverd Will 
Is, not to have it, or to use it ill. 
The Dangers much the same; on several Shelves
If others wreck us or we wreck our selves.  

What then remains, but, waving each Extreme,  
The Tides of Ignorance, and Pride to stem?  
Neither so rich a Treasure to forgo;  
Nor proudly seek beyond our powr to know:
Faith is not built on disquisitions vain; 
The things we must believe, are few and plain:  
But since men will believe more than they need; 
And every man will make himself a Creed,  
In doubtfull questions tis the safest way
To learn what unsuspected Ancients say: 
For tis not likely we should higher Soar 
Insearch of Heavn than all the Church before:  
Nor can we be deceivd, unless we see 
The Scripture and the Fathers disagree.
If after all, they stand suspected still, 
(For no mans Faith depends upon his Will;) 
Tis some Relief, that points not clearly known,  
Without much hazard may be let alone: 
And after hearing what our Church can say,
If still our Reason runs another way, 
That private Reason tis more Just to curb, 
Than by Disputes the publick Peace disturb. 
For points obscure are of small use to learn: 
But Common quiet is Mankinds concern.

Thus have I made my own Opinions clear: 
Yet neither Praise expect, not Censure fear:  
And this unpolishd, rugged Verse I chose;  
As fittest for Discourse, and nearest prose:  
For while from Sacred Truth I do not swerve,
Tom Sternholds or Tom Shalls Rhimes will serve.

**
The Hind and the Panther
***

A milk white Hind, immortal and unchangd,  
Fed on the lawns and in the forest rangd;  
Without unspotted, innocent within, 
She feard no danger, for she knew no sin.  
Yet had she oft been chasd with horns and hounds
And Scythian shafts; and many winged wounds 
Aimd at her Heart; was often forcd to fly,  
And doomd to death, though fated not to dy.  
Not so her young; for their unequal line  
Was Heroes make, half humane, half divine.
Their earthly mold obnoxious was to fate, 
Th immortal part assumd immortal state. 
Of these a slaughtered army lay in bloud, 
Extended oer the Caledonian wood,  
Their native walk; whose vocal bloud arose
And cryd for pardon on their perjurd foes;  
Their fate was fruitful, and the sanguin seed,  
Endud with souls, encreasd the sacred breed.  
So Captive Israel multiplyd in chains, 
A numerous Exile; and enjoyd her pains.
With grief and gladness mixt, their mother viewd 
Her martyrd offspring, and their race renewd; 
Their corps to perish, but their kind to last,  
So much the deathless plant the dying fruit surpassd.  
Panting and pensive now she ranged alone,
And wanderd in the kingdoms once Her own.  
The common Hunt, though from their rage restraind  
By sovreign power, her company disdaind:  
Grind as They passd, and with a glaring eye 
Gave gloomy signs of secret enmity.
Tis true, she bounded by, and tripd so light, 
They had not time to take a steady sight, 
For truth has such a face and such a meen 
As to be lovd needs only to be seen. 
The bloudy Bear, an Independent beast,
Unlickd to form, in groans her hate expressd. 
Among the timorous kind the Quaking Hare  
Professd neutrality, but would not swear.  
Next her, the Buffoon Ape, as Atheists use, 
Mimickd all Sects and had his own to chuse:
Still when the Lyon lookd, his knees he bent,  
And payd at Church a Courtiers Complement.  
The bristld Baptist Boar, impure as He,  
(But whitnd with the foam of sanctity) 
With fat pollutions filld the sacred place
And mountains levelld in his furious race, 
So first rebellion founded was in grace.  
But, since the mighty ravage which he made  
In German Forests, had his guilt betrayd,  
With broken tusks, and with a borrowd name,
He shund the vengeance, and concealed the shame; 
So lurkd in Sects unseen. With greater guile 
False Reynard fed on consecrated spoil; 
The graceless beast by Athanasius first 
Was chased from Nice; then by Socinus nursd.
His impious race their blasphemy renewd, 
And natures King through natures opticks viewd. 
Reversd they viewd him lessend to their eye, 
Nor in an Infant could a God descry:  
New swarming Sects to this obliquely tend
Hence they began, and here they all will end. 
What weight of ancient witness can prevail, 
If private reason hold the publick scale? 
But, gratious God, how well dost thou provide 
For erring judgments an unerring Guide!
Thy throne is darkness in th abyss of light, 
A blaze of glory that forbids the sight;  
O teach me to believe Thee thus conceald,  
And search no farther than Thy self reveald; 
But her alone for my Directour take
Whom Thou hast promisd never to forsake! 
My thoughtless youth was wingd with vain desires,  
My manhood, long misled by wandring fires,  
Followd false lights; and when their glimps was gone,  
My pride struck out new sparkles of her own.
Such was I, such by nature still I am,  
Be Thine the glory and be mine the shame. 
Good life be now my task: my doubts are done, 
(What more could fright my faith, than Three in One?) 
Can I believe eternal God could lye
Disguisd in mortal mold and infancy? 
That the great Maker of the world could dye?  
And after that, trust my imperfect sense  
Which calls in question his omnipotence?  
Can I my reason to my faith compell,
And shall my sight, and touch, and taste rebell?  
Superiour faculties are set aside,  
Shall their subservient organs be my guide? 
Then let the moon usurp the rule of day,  
And winking tapers shew the sun his way;
For what my senses can themselves perceive  
I need no revelation to believe.  
Can they, who say the Host should be descryd 
By sense, define a body glorifyd?  
Impassible, and penetrating parts?
Let them declare by what mysterious arts  
He shot that body through th opposing might  
Of bolts and barrs impervious to the light, 
And stood before his train confessd in open sight. 
For since thus wondrously he passd, tis plain
One single place two bodies did contain,  
And sure the same Omnipotence as well 
Can make one body in more places dwell. 
Let reason then at Her own quarry fly,  
But how can finite grasp Infinity?
Tis urgd again, that faith did first commence 
By miracles, which are appeals to sense,  
And thence concluded that our sense must be 
The motive still of credibility.  
For latter ages must on former wait,
And what began belief, must propagate.  
But winnow well this thought, and you shall find, 
Tis light as chaff that flies before the wind. 
Were all those wonders wrought by powr divine  
As means or ends of some more deep design?
Most sure as means, whose end was this alone, 
To prove the god-head of th eternal Son. 
God thus asserted: man is to believe  
Beyond what Sense and Reason can conceive.  
And for mysterious things of faith rely
On the Proponent, heavens authority. 
If then our faith we for our guide admit, 
Vain is the farther search of human wit,  
As when the building gains a surer stay,  
We take th unuseful scaffolding away:
Reason by sense no more can understand, 
The game is playd into another hand. 
Why chuse we then like Bilanders to creep 
Along the coast, and land in view to keep,  
When safely we may launch into the deep?
In the same vessel which our Saviour bore 
Himself the pilot, let us leave the shoar,  
And with a better guide a better world explore. 
Could He his god-head veil with flesh and bloud 
And not veil these again to be our food?
His grace in both is equal in extent; 
The first affords us life, the second nourishment.  
And if he can, why all this frantick pain 
To construe what his clearest words contain,  
And make a riddle what He made so plain?
To take up half on trust, and half to try,  
Name it not faith, but bungling biggottry.  
Both knave and fool the Merchant we may call  
To pay great summs and to compound the small. 
For who woud break with heavn, and woud not break for all?
Rest then, my soul, from endless anguish freed; 
Nor sciences thy guide, nor sense thy creed.  
Faith is the best ensurer of thy bliss; 
The Bank above must fail before the venture miss. 
But heavn and heavn-born faith are far from Thee,
Thou first Apostate to Divinity.  
Unkenneld range in thy Polonian Plains;  
A fiercer foe the insatiate Wolf remains. 
Too boastful Britain please thyself no more,  
That beasts of prey are banishd from thy shoar;
The Bear, the Boar, and every salvage name, 
Wild in effect, though in appearance tame,  
Lay waste thy woods, destroy thy blissfull bowr, 
And, muzld though they seem, the mutes devour. 
More haughty than the rest, the wolfish race
Appear with belly Gaunt and famishd face:  
Never was so deformd a beast of Grace. 
His ragged tail betwixt his leggs he wears  
Close clapd for shame, but his rough crest he rears, 
And pricks up his predestinating ears.
His wild disorderd walk, his haggerd eyes,  
Did all the bestial citizens surprize.  
Though feard and hated, yet he ruled a while,  
As Captain or Companion of the spoil. 
Full many a year his hatefull head had been
For tribute paid, nor since in Cambria seen:  
The last of all the Litter scapd by chance,  
And from Geneva first infested France.  
Some Authors thus his Pedigree will trace,  
But others write him of an upstart Race:
Because of Wickliffs Brood no mark he brings 
But his innate Antipathy to Kings.  
These last deduce him from th Helvetian kind 
Who near the Leman lake his Consort lind.  
That firy Zuynglius first th Affection bred,
And meagre Calvin blest the Nuptial Bed.  
In Israel some believe him whelpd long since,  
When the proud Sanhedrim oppressd the Prince,  
Or, since he will be Jew, derive him higher,  
When Corah with his Brethren did conspire,
From Moyses Hand the Sovreign sway to wrest, 
And Aaron of his Ephod to devest: 
Till opening Earth made way for all to pass,  
And coud not bear the Burdn of a class. 
The Fox and he came shuffld in the Dark,
If ever they were stowd in Noahs Ark: 
Perhaps not made; for all their barking train 
The Dog (a common species) will contain.  
And some wild currs, who from their masters ran,  
Abhorring the supremacy of man,
In woods and caves the rebel-race began.  
O happy pair, how well have you encreasd,  
What ills in Church and State have you redressd! 
With Teeth untryd and rudiments of Claws,  
Your first essay was on your native Laws:
Those having torn with Ease and trampld down,  
Your Fangs you fastend on the miterd Crown, 
And freed from God and Monarchy your Town.  
What though your native kennel still be small 
Bounded betwixt a Puddle and a Wall,
Yet your Victorious Colonies are sent 
Where the North Ocean girds the Continent.  
Quickned with fire below, your Monsters Breed,  
In Fenny Holland and in fruitful Tweed. 
And like the first the last effects to be
Drawn to the dreggs of a Democracy. 
As, where in Fields the fairy rounds are seen,  
A rank sowr herbage rises on the Green;  
So, springing where these mid-night Elves advance,  
Rebellion Prints the Foot-steps of the Dance.
Such are their Doctrines, such contempt they show 
To Heaven above, and to their Prince below, 
As none but Traytors and Blasphemers know.  
God, like the Tyrant of the Skies is placd,  
And Kings, like slaves, beneath the Crowd debasd.
So fulsome is their food that Flocks refuse 
To bite; and only Dogs for Physick use. 
As, where the Lightning runs along the Ground,  
No husbandry can heal the blasting Wound, 
Nor bladed Grass nor bearded Corn succeeds,
But Scales of Scurf, and Putrefaction breeds: 
Such Warrs, such Waste, such fiery tracks of Dearth 
Their Zeal has left, and such a teemless Earth. 
But as the Poisons of the deadliest kind  
Are to their own unhappy Coasts confind,
As only Indian Shades of sight deprive, 
And Magick Plants will but in Colchos thrive; 
So Presbytry and Pestilential Zeal 
Can only flourish in a Common-weal. 
From Celtique Woods is chased the wolfish Crew;
But ah! some Pity een to Brutes is due,  
Their native Walks, methinks, they might enjoy, 
Curbd of their native Malice to destroy. 
Of all the Tyrannies on humane kind 
The worst is that which Persecutes the mind.
Let us but weigh at what offence we strike, 
Tis but because we cannot think alike. 
In punishing of this, we overthrow  
The Laws of Nations and of Nature too 
Beasts are the Subjects of Tyrannick sway,
Where still the stronger on the weaker Prey.  
Man only of a softer mold is made;  
Not for his Fellows ruine, but their Aid. 
Created kind, beneficent and free,  
The noble Image of the Deity.
One Portion of informing Fire was givn 
To Brutes, the Inferiour Family of Heavn:  
The Smith Divine, as with a careless Beat,  
Struck out the mute Creation at a Heat: 
But when arrivd at last to humane Race,
The Godhead took a deep considring space:  
And, to distinguish Man from all the rest,  
Unlockd the sacred Treasures of his Breast:  
And Mercy mixt with reason did impart,  
One to his Head, the other to his Heart:
Reason to Rule, but Mercy to forgive: 
The first is Law, the last Prerogative. 
And like his Mind his outward form appeard 
When issuing Naked to the wondring Herd,  
He charmd their Eyes, and for they lovd they feard.
Not armd with horns of arbitrary might,  
Or Claws to seize their furry spoils in Fight,  
Or with increase of Feet t oertake em in their flight. 
Of easie shape, and pliant evry way, 
Confessing still the softness of his Clay,
And kind as Kings upon their Coronation-day:  
With open Hands, and with extended space  
Of Arms to satisfy a large embrace. 
Thus kneaded up with Milk, the new made Man 
His Kingdom oer his Kindred world began:
Till Knowledg mis-applyd, mis-understood,  
And pride of Empire sourd his Balmy Blood. 
Then, first rebelling, his own stamp he coins;  
The Murthrer Cain was latent in his Loins; 
And Blood began its first and loudest Cry
For diffring worship of the Deity. 
Thus persecution rose, and farther Space  
Producd the mighty hunter of his Race. 
Not so the blessed Pan his flock encreased, 
Content to fold em from the famishd Beast:
Mild were his laws; the Sheep and harmless Hind 
Were never of the persecuting kind. 
Such pity now the pious Pastor shows, 
Such mercy from the British Lyon flows, 
That both provide protection for their foes.
Oh happy Regions, Italy and Spain,  
Which never did those monsters entertain! 
The Wolfe, the Bear, the Boar, can there advance  
No native claim of just inheritance.  
And self preserving laws, severe in show,
May guard their fences from th invading foe. 
Where birth has placd em, let em safely share  
The common benefit of vital air;  
Themselves unharmful, let them live unharmd; 
Their jaws disabld, and their claws disarmd:
Here, only in nocturnal howlings bold,  
They dare not seize the Hind nor leap the fold. 
More powrful, and as vigilant as they, 
The Lyon awfully forbids the prey.  
Their rage repressd, though pinchd with famine sore,
They stand aloof, and tremble at his roar;  
Much is their hunger, but their fear is more. 
These are the chief; to number oer the rest  
And stand, like Adam, naming evry beast, 
Were weary work; nor will the Muse describe
A slimy-born and sun-begotten Tribe:  
Who, far from steeples and their sacred sound,  
In fields their sullen conventicles found:  
These gross, half animated lumps I leave; 
Nor can I think what thoughts they can conceive.
But if they think at all, tis sure no highr 
Than matter, put in motion, may aspire. 
Souls that can scarce ferment their mass of clay; 
So drossy, so divisible are They, 
As woud but serve pure bodies for allay:
Such souls as Shards produce, such beetle things  
As only buz to heaven with evning wings; 
Strike in the dark, offending but by chance,  
Such are the blind-fold blows of ignorance. 
They know not beings, and but hate a name,
To them the Hind and Panther are the same.  
The Panther sure the noblest, next the Hind,  
And fairest creature of the spotted kind: 
Oh, could her in-born stains be washd away,  
She were too good to be a beast of Prey!
How can I praise, or blame, and not offend, 
Or how divide the frailty from the friend?  
Her faults and vertues lye so mixd, that she 
Nor wholly stands condemnd nor wholly free.  
Then, like her injured Lyon, let me speak,
He cannot bend her, and he would not break. 
Unkind already, and estrangd in part,  
The Wolfe begins to share her wandring heart. 
Though unpolluted yet with actual ill,  
She half commits, who sins but in Her will.
If, as our dreaming Platonists report,  
There could be spirits of a middle sort,  
Too black for heavn, and yet too white for hell, 
Who just dropt half-way done, nor lower fell; 
So poisd, so gently she descends from high,
It seems a soft dismission from the skie. 
Her house not ancient, whatsoeer pretence  
Her clergy Heraulds make in her defence.  
A second century not half-way run 
Since the new honours of her blood begun.
A Lyon old, obscene, and furious made 
By lust, compressd her mother in a shade.  
Then by a left-hand marrage weds the Dame, 
Covering adultry with a specious name: 
So schism begot; and sacrilege and she,
A well-matchd pair, got graceless heresie. 
Gods and Kings rebels have the same good cause,  
To trample down divine and humane laws: 
Both would be calld Reformers, and their hate, 
Alike destructive both to Church and State:
The fruit proclaims the plant; a lawless Prince 
By luxury reformd incontinence,  
By ruins, charity; by riots abstinence. 
Confessions, fasts and penance set aside; 
Oh with what ease we follow such a guide!
Where souls are starvd and senses gratifyd! 
Where marrage pleasures midnight prayr supply,  
And mattin bells (a melancholy cry) 
Are tund to merrier notes, encrease and multiply.  
Religion shows a Rosie colourd face,
Not hatterd out with drudging works of grace;  
A down-hill Reformation rolls apace.  
What flesh and blood woud croud the narrow gate, 
Or, till they waste their pamperd paunches, wait?  
All woud be happy at the cheapest rate.
Though our lean faith these rigid laws has givn, 
The full fed Musulman goes fat to heavn; 
For his Arabian Prophet with delights 
Of sense, allurd his eastern Proselytes. 
The jolly Luther, reading him, began
T interpret Scriptures by his Alcoran; 
To grub the thorns beneath our tender feet  
And make the paths of Paradise more sweet:  
Bethought him of a wife, eer half way gone,  
(For twas uneasie travailing alone,)
And in this masquerade of mirth and love, 
Mistook the bliss of heavn for Bacchanals above. 
Sure he presumd of praise, who came to stock 
Th etherial pastures with so fair a flock; 
Burnishd, and batning on their food, to show
The diligence of carefull herds below.  
Our Panther, though like these she changd her head,  
Yet, as the mistress of a monarchs bed,  
Her front erect with majesty she bore,  
The Crozier wielded and the Miter wore.
Her upper part of decent discipline 
Shewd affectation of an ancient line:  
And fathers, councils, church and churchs head,  
Were on her reverend Phylacteries read. 
But what disgracd and disavowd the rest
Was Calvins brand, that stigmatizd the beast. 
Thus, like a creature of a double kind, 
In her own labyrinth she lives confind.  
To foreign lands no sound of Her is come, 
Humbly content to be despisd at home.
Such is her faith, where good cannot be had,  
At least she leaves the refuse of the bad.  
Nice in her choice of ill, though not of best,  
And least deformd, because reformd the least. 
In doubtful points betwixt her diffring friends,
Where one for substance, one for sign contends, 
Their contradicting terms she strives to joyn 
Sign shall be substance, substance shall be sign. 
A real presence all her sons allow, 
And yet tis flat Idolatry to bow,
Because the God-heads there they know not how. 
Her Novices are taught that bread and wine  
Are but the visible and outward sign, 
Receivd by those who in communion joyn.  
But th inward grace or the thing signifyd,
His blood and body who to save us dyd, 
The faithful this thing signifyd receive.  
What ist those faithful then partake or leave? 
For what is signifyd and understood, 
Is, by her own confession, flesh and blood.
Then, by the same acknowledgment, we know 
They take the sign, and take the substance too. 
The litral sense is hard to flesh and blood, 
But nonsense never can be understood. 
Her wild belief on evry wave is tost,
But sure no Church can better morals boast. 
True to her King her principles are found;  
Oh that her practice were but half so sound!  
Stedfast in various turns of state she stood, 
And seald her vowd affection with her blood;
Nor will I meanly tax her constancy,  
That intrest or obligement made the tye, 
(Bound to the fate of murdrd Monarchy:)  
(Before the sounding Ax so falls the Vine,  
Whose tender branches round the Poplar twine.)
She chose her ruin, and resignd her life,  
In death undaunted as an Indian wife: 
A rare example: But some souls we see 
Grow hard, and stiffen with adversity:  
Yet these by fortunes favours are undone,
Resolvd into a baser form they run,  
And bore the wind, but cannot bear the sun. 
Let this be natures frailty or her fate,  
Or Isgrims counsel, her new chosen mate; 
Still shes the fairest of the fallen Crew,
No mother more indulgent but the true.  
Fierce to her foes, yet fears her force to try, 
Because she wants innate auctority; 
For how can she constrain them to obey  
Who has her self cast off the lawful sway?
Rebellion equals all, and those who toil  
In common theft, will share the common spoil. 
Let her produce the title and the right 
Against her old superiours first to fight;  
If she reform by Text, evn thats as plain
For her own Rebels to reform again. 
As long as words a diffrent sense will bear, 
And each may be his own Interpreter,  
Our airy faith will no foundation find 
The words a weathercock for evry wind:
The Bear, the Fox, the Wolfe by turns prevail,  
The most in powr supplies the present gale.  
The wretched Panther crys aloud for aid 
To church and councils, whom she first betrayd;  
No help from Fathers or traditions train
Those ancient guides she taught us to disdain.  
And by that scripture which she once abusd 
To Reformation, stands herself accusd. 
What bills for breach of laws can she prefer, 
Expounding which she owns her self may err?
And, after all her winding ways are tryd,  
If doubts arise, she slips herself aside  
And leaves the private conscience for the guide.  
If then that conscience set th offender free,  
It bars her claim to church auctority.
How can she censure, or what crime pretend, 
But Scripture may be construd to defend? 
Evn those whom for rebellion she transmits 
To civil powr, her doctrine first acquits; 
Because no disobedience can ensue,
Where no submission to a Judge is due;  
Each judging for himself, by her consent, 
Whom thus absolvd she sends to punishment. 
Suppose the Magistrate revenge her cause, 
Tis only for transgressing humane laws.
How answring to its end a church is made,  
Whose powr is but to counsel and perswade? 
O solid rock, on which secure she stands! 
Eternal house, not built with mortal hands! 
Oh sure defence against th infernal gate,
A patent during pleasure of the state!  
Thus is the Panther neither lovd nor feard, 
A mere mock Queen of a divided Herd;  
Whom soon by lawful powr she might controll, 
Her self a part submitted to the whole.
Then, as the Moon who first receives the light  
By which she makes our nether regions bright, 
So might she shine, reflecting from afar  
The rays she borrowed from a better Star: 
Big with the beams which from her mother flow
And reigning oer the rising tides below: 
Now, mixing with a salvage croud, she goes, 
And meanly flatters her invetrate foes,  
Ruld while she rules, and losing evry hour  
Her wretched remnants of precarious powr.
One evening, while the cooler shade she sought, 
Revolving many a melancholy thought,  
Alone she walkd, and lookd around in vain,  
With ruful visage for her vanishd train: 
None of her sylvan subjects made their court;
Leves and couches passd without resort.  
So hardly can Usurpers manage well  
Those whom they first instructed to rebel:  
More liberty begets desire of more, 
The hunger still encreases with the store.
Without respect they brushd along the wood,  
Each in his clan, and filld with loathsome food, 
Askd no permission to the neighbring flood. 
The Panther, full of inward discontent, 
Since they woud goe, before em wisely went:
Supplying want of powr by drinking first,  
As if she gave em leave to quench their thirst.  
Among the rest, the Hind, with fearful face 
Beheld from far the common watring-place,  
Nor durst approach; till with an awful roar
The sovereign Lyon bad her fear no more.  
Encouragd thus, she brought her younglings nigh, 
Watching the motions of her Patrons eye, 
And drank a sober draught; the rest amazd  
Stood mutely still, and on the stranger gazd:
Surveyd her part by part, and sought to find 
The ten-hornd monster in the harmless Hind,  
Such as the Wolfe and Panther had designd: 
They thought at first they dreamd, for twas offence 
With them, to question certitude of sense,
Their guide in faith; but nearer when they drew,  
And had the faultless object full in view,  
Lord, how they all admird her heavnly hiew! 
Some, who before her fellowship disdaind,  
Scarce, and but scarce, from inborn rage restraind,
Now friskd about her and old kindred feignd.  
Whether for love or intrest, every sect  
Of all the salvage nation shewd respect: 
The Vice-roy Panther could not awe the herd,  
The more the company the less they feard.
The surly Wolfe with secret envy burst, 
Yet coud not howl, the Hind had seen him first:  
But what he durst not speak, the Panther durst. 
For when the herd suffisd, did late repair 
To ferney heaths and to their forest lare,
She made a mannerly excuse to stay, 
Proffering the Hind to wait her half the way: 
That since the Skie was clear, an hour of talk  
Might help her to beguile the tedious walk. 
With much good-will the motion was embracd,
To chat a while on their adventures passd: 
Nor had the grateful Hind so soon forgot  
Her friend and fellow-suffrer in the plot. 
Yet wondring how of late she grew estrangd,  
Her forehead cloudy and her countnance changd,
She thought this hour th occasion would present  
To learn her secret cause of discontent,  
Which, well she hopd, might be with ease redressd,  
Considering Her a well-bred civil beast,  
And more a Gentlewoman than the rest.
After some common talk what rumours ran,  
The Lady of the spotted-muff began.

DAME, said the Panther, times are mended well 
Since late among the Philistines you fell.  
The Toils were pitchd, a spacious tract of ground  
With expert Huntsmen was encompassd round; 
The Enclosure narrowd; the sagacious powr
Of Hounds, and Death drew nearer, evry Hour. 
Tis true, the younger Lyon scapd the snare, 
But all your priestly Calves lay strugling there; 
As sacrifices on their Altars laid; 
While you their careful mother wisely fled
Not trusting destiny to save your head. 
For, whateer Promises you have applyd 
To your unfailing Church, the surer side  
Is four fair Leggs in danger to provide.  
And whateer tales of Peters Chair you tell,
Yet, saving Reverence of the Miracle, 
The better luck was yours to scape so well.  
As I remember, said the sober Hind, 
Those Toils were for your own dear self designd, 
As well as me; and with the self same throw,
To catch the Quarry and the Vermin too, 
(Forgive the slandrous Tongues that calld you so.)  
Howeer you take it now, the common Cry 
Then ran you down for your rank Loyalty;  
Besides, in Popery they thought you nurst,
(As evil tongues will ever speak the worst,)  
Because some forms, and ceremonies some 
You kept, and stood in the main question dumb.  
Dumb you were born indeed; but thinking long  
The Test, it seems, at last has loosd your tongue.
And, to explain what your forefathers meant,  
By real presence in the Sacrament,  
(After long fencing pushd against a wall,) 
Your salvo comes, that hes not there at all: 
There changd your faith, and what may change may fall.
Who can believe what varies every day,  
Nor ever was, nor will be at a stay?  
Tortures may force the tongue untruths to tell, 
And I neer ownd my self infallible, 
Replyd the Panther; grant such Presence were,
Yet in your sense I never ownd it there. 
A real vertue we by faith receive,  
And that we in the sacrament believe. 
Then, said the Hind, as you the matter state, 
Not only Jesuits can equivocate;
For real, as you now the Word expound,  
From Solid Substance dwindles to a Sound. 
Methinks an Esops fable you repeat;  
You know who took the Shadow for the Meat;  
Your Churchs substance thus you change at will,
And yet retain your former figure still.  
I freely grant you spoke to save your Life, 
For then you lay beneath the Butchers Knife.  
Long time you fought, redoubld Battry bore, 
But, after all, against your self you swore;
Your former self, for evry Hour your form  
Is chopd and changd, like Winds before a Storm. 
Thus Fear and Intrest will prevail with some,  
For all have not the Gift of Martyrdom. 
The Panther grind at this, and thus replyd;
That men may err was never yet denyd.  
But, if that common principle be true,  
The Cannon, Dame, is leveld full at you. 
But, shunning long disputes, I fain woud see 
That wondrous Wight, infallibility.
Is he from Heavn this mighty Champion come 
Or lodgd below in subterranean Rome? 
First, seat him somewhere, and derive his Race, 
Or else conclude that nothing has no place. 
Suppose, (though I disown it,) said the Hind,
The certain Mansion were not yet assignd,  
The doubtful residence no proof can bring 
Against the plain existence of the thing. 
Because Philosophers may disagree,  
If sight b emission or reception be,
Shall it be thence inferd I do not see?  
But you require an Answer positive, 
Which yet, when I demand, you dare not give;  
For Fallacies in Universals live. 
I then affirm that this unfailing guide
In Pope and genral Councils must reside; 
Both lawful, both combind; what one decrees  
By numerous Votes, the other Ratifies:  
On this undoubted Sense the Church relies.  
Tis true some Doctors in a scantier space,
I mean in each apart contract the Place.  
Some, who to greater length extend the Line,  
The Churches after acceptation join.  
This last Circumference appears too wide, 
The Church diffusd is by the Council tyd;
As members by their Representatives 
Obligd to Laws which Prince and Senate gives:  
Thus some contract, and some enlarge the space; 
In Pope and Council who denies the place, 
Assisted from above with Gods unfailing grace?
Those Canons all the needful points contain;  
Their sense so obvious, and their words so plain, 
That no disputes about the doubtful Text  
Have, hitherto, the labring world perplexd: 
If any shoud in after times appear,
New Councils must be calld, to make the meaning clear. 
Because in them the powr supreme resides;  
And all the promises are to the Guides. 
This may be taught with sound and safe Defence: 
But mark how sandy is your own pretence,
Who, setting Councils, Pope, and Church aside,  
Are evry Man his own presuming Guide.  
The sacred Books, you say, are full and plain,  
And evry needful point of Truth contain; 
All who can read, Interpreters may be:
Thus though your several Churches disagree, 
Yet evry Saint has to himself alone  
The Secret of this Philosophick Stone.  
These Principles your jarring Sects unite,  
When diffring Doctors and Disciples fight.
Though Luther, Zuinglius, Calvin, holy Chiefs,  
Have made a Battel Royal of Beliefs;  
Or like wild Horses sevral ways have whirld 
The torturd Text about the Christian World;  
Each Jehu lashing on with furious force,
That Turk or Jew coud not have usd it worse.  
No matter what dissension leaders make  
Where evry private man may save a stake: 
Ruld by the Scripture and his own advice,  
Each has a blind by-path to Paradise;
Where driving in a Circle slow or fast, 
Opposing Sects are sure to meet at last.  
A wondrous charity you have in Store  
For all reformd to pass the narrow Door: 
So much, that Mahomet had scarcely more.
For he, kind Prophet, was for damning none, 
But Christ and Moyses were to save their own: 
Himself was to secure his chosen race,  
Though reason good for Turks to take the place, 
And he allowd to be the better man
In virtue of his holier Alcoran.  
True, said the Panther, I shall neer deny  
My Brethren may be savd as well as I: 
Though Huguenots contemn our ordination,  
Succession, ministerial vocation,
And Luther, more mistaking what he read,  
Misjoins the sacred Body with the Bread;  
Yet, Lady, still remember I maintain  
The Word in needfull points is only plain.  
Needless or needful I not now contend,
For still you have a loophole for a friend, 
(Rejoynd the Matron) but the rule you lay  
Has led whole flocks and leads them still astray  
In weighty points, and full damnations way.  
For did not Arius first, Socinus now
The Sons eternal god-head disavow, 
And did not these by Gospel Texts alone 
Condemn our doctrine, and maintain their own? 
Have not all hereticks the same pretence, 
To plead the Scriptures in their own defence?
How did the Nicene council then decide  
That strong debate, was it by Scripture tryd?  
No sure to those the Rebel would not yield, 
Squadrons of Texts he marshald in the field; 
That was but civil war, an equal set,
Where Piles with piles, and Eagles Eagles met.  
With Texts point-blank and plain he facd the Foe:  
And did not Sathan tempt our Saviour so?  
The good old Bishops took a simpler way,  
Each askd but what he heard his Father say,
Or how he was instructed in his youth,  
And by traditions force upheld the truth.  
The Panther smild at this, and when, said she, 
Were those first Councils disallowd by me? 
Or where did I at sure tradition strike,
Provided still it were Apostolick?  
Friend, said the Hind, you quit your former ground, 
Where all your faith you did on Scripture found,  
Now, tis tradition joined with holy writ;  
But thus your memory betrays your wit.
No, said the Panther, for in that I view  
When your traditions forgd, and when tis true. 
I set em by the rule, and as they square 
Or deviate from undoubted doctrine there, 
This Oral fiction, that old Faith declare.
(Hind.) The Council steered, it seems, a diffrent course,  
They tryd the Scripture by traditions force;  
But you tradition by the Scripture try; 
Pursud, by sects, from this to that you fly, 
Nor dare on one foundation to rely.
The Word is then deposd, and in this view  
You rule the Scripture, not the Scripture you.  
Thus said the Dame, and, smiling, thus pursud, 
I see tradition then is disallowd, 
When not evincd by Scripture to be true,
And Scripture, as interpreted by you. 
But here you tread upon unfaithfull ground; 
Unless you coud infallibly expound.  
Which you reject as odious Popery,  
And throw that doctrine back with scorn on me.
Suppose we on things traditive divide,  
And both appeal to Scripture to decide; 
By various texts we both uphold our claim 
Nay, often ground our titles on the same: 
After long labour lost, and times expence,
Both grant the words and quarrel for the sense. 
Thus all disputes for ever must depend; 
For no dumb rule can controversies end. 
Thus when you said tradition must be tryd  
By Sacred Writ, whose sense your selves decide,
You said no more, but that your selves must be  
The judges of the Scripture sense, not we.  
Against our church tradition you declare, 
And yet your Clerks would sit in Moyses chair:  
At least tis provd against your argument,
The rule is far from plain, where all dissent.  
If not by Scriptures, how can we be sure, 
(Replied the Panther) what traditions pure?  
For you may palm upon us new for old, 
All, as they say, that glitters is not gold.
How but by following her, replyd the dame, 
To whom derivd from sire to son they came; 
Where evry age dos on another move, 
And trusts no farther than the next above;  
Where all the rounds like Jacobs ladder rise,
The lowest hid in earth, the topmost in the skyes?  
Sternly the salvage did her answer mark,  
Her glowing eye-balls glittring in the dark, 
And said but this, since lucre was your trade,  
Succeeding times such dreadfull gaps have made
Tis dangerous climbing: to your sons and you 
I leave the ladder, and its omen too. 
(Hind.) The Panthers breath was ever famd for sweet,  
But from the Wolf such wishes oft I meet: 
You learnd this language from the blatant beast,
Or rather did not speak, but were possessd.  
As for your answer, tis but barely urgd;  
You must evince tradition to be forgd; 
Produce plain proofs; unblemished authors use 
As ancient as those ages they accuse;
Till when tis not sufficient to defame:  
An old possession stands, till Elder quitts the claim.  
Then for our intrest, which is namd alone 
To load with envy, we retort your own.  
For when traditions in your faces fly,
Resolving not to yield, you must decry: 
As when the cause goes hard, the guilty man 
Excepts, and thins his jury all he can; 
So when you stand of other aid bereft,  
You to the twelve Apostles would be left.
Your friend the Wolfe did with more craft provide 
To set those toys traditions quite aside: 
And Fathers too, unless when reason spent 
He cites em but sometimes for ornament.  
But, Madam Panther, you, though more sincere,
Are not so wise as your Adulterer:  
The private spirit is a better blind  
Than all the dodging tricks your authours find. 
For they who left the Scripture to the crowd, 
Each for his own peculiar judge allowd;
The way to please em was to make em proud.  
Thus with full sails they ran upon the shelf; 
Who coud suspect a couzenage from himself? 
On his own reason safer tis to stand,  
Than be deceivd and damnd at second hand.
But you who Fathers and traditions take 
And garble some, and some you quite forsake,  
Pretending church auctority to fix, 
And yet some grains of private spirit mix,  
Are like a Mule made up of diffring seed,
And thats the reason why you never breed;  
At least not propagate your kind abroad,  
For home-dissenters are by statutes awd. 
And yet they grow upon you evry day, 
While you (to speak the best) are at a stay,
For sects that are extremes, abhor a middle way.  
Like tricks of state, to stop a raging flood, 
Or mollify a mad-braind Senates mood: 
Of all expedients never one was good. 
Well may they argue, (nor can you deny,)
If we must fix on church auctority, 
Best on the best, the fountain, not the flood,  
That must be better still, if this be good. 
Shall she command who has herself rebelld? 
Is Antichrist by Antichrist expelld?
Did we a lawfull tyranny displace,  
To set aloft a bastard of the race? 
Why all these wars to win the Book, if we 
Must not interpret for our selves, but she? 
Either be wholly slaves or wholly free.
For purging fires traditions must not fight;  
But they must prove Episcopacys right: 
Thus those led horses are from service freed; 
You never mount em but in time of need.  
Like mercenarys, hird for home defence,
They will not serve against their native Prince.  
Against domestick foes of Hierarchy 
These are drawn forth, to make fanaticks fly; 
But, when they see their country-men at hand. 
Marching against em under church-command,
Streight they forsake their colours and disband.  
Thus she, nor coud the Panther well enlarge; 
With weak defence against so strong a charge; 
But said, for what did Christ his Word provide, 
If still his church must want a living guide?
And if all saving doctrines are not there,  
Or sacred Pen-men could not make em clear, 
From after-ages we should hope in vain  
For truths, which men inspird, coud not explain.  
Before the Word was written, said the Hind,
Our Saviour preached his Faith to humane kind;  
From his Apostles the first age receivd  
Eternal truth, and what they taught, believd.  
Thus by tradition faith was planted first;  
Succeeding flocks succeeding Pastours nursd.
This was the way our wise Redeemer chose, 
(Who sure could all things for the best dispose,) 
To fence his fold from their encroaching foes.  
He coud have writ himself, but well foresaw  
Th event would be like that of Moyses law;
Some difference woud arise, some doubts remain,  
Like those which yet the jarring Jews maintain. 
No written laws can be so plain, so pure, 
But wit may gloss and malice may obscure; 
Not those indited by his first command,
A Prophet gravd the text, an Angel held his hand.  
Thus faith was eer the written word appeard,  
And men believd, not what they read, but heard,  
But since the Apostles coud not be confind  
To these, or those, but severally designd
Their large commission round the world to blow, 
To spread their faith they spread their labours too.  
Yet still their absent flock their pains did share; 
They hearkend still, for love produces care. 
And as mistakes arose, or discords fell,
Or bold seducers taught em to rebel, 
As charity grew cold or faction hot,  
Or long neglect their lessons had forgot, 
For all their wants they wisely did provide,  
And preaching by Epistles was supplyd:
So, great Physicians cannot all attend, 
But some they visit and to some they send.  
Yet all those letters were not writ to all, 
Nor first intended, but occasional  
Their absent sermons; nor if they contain
All needfull doctrines, are those doctrines plain.  
Clearness by frequent preaching must be wrought;  
They writ but seldom, but they daily taught.  
And what one Saint has said of holy Paul, 
He darkly writ, is true applyd to all.
For this obscurity coud heavn provide 
More prudently than by a living guide,  
As doubts arose, the difference to decide?  
A guide was therefore needfull, therefore made; 
And, if appointed, sure to be obeyd.
Thus, with due reverence to th Apostles writ,  
By which my sons are taught, to which, submit,  
I think, those truths their sacred works contain  
The church alone can certainly explain; 
That following ages, leaning on the past,
May rest upon the Primitive at last.  
Nor would I thence the word no rule infer,  
But none without the church interpreter;  
Because, as I have urgd before, tis mute, 
And is it self the subject of dispute.
But what th Apostles their successors taught,  
They to the next, from them to us is brought, 
Th undoubted sense which is in Scripture sought. 
From hence the Church is armd, when errours rise,  
To stop their entrance, and prevent surprise;
And safe entrenchd within, her foes without defies.  
By these all festring sores her counsels heal,  
Which time or has discloasd or shall reveal, 
For discord cannot end without a last appeal. 
Nor can a council national decide,
But with subordination to her Guide,  
(I wish the cause were on that issue tryd.)  
Much less the scripture; for suppose debate 
Betwixt pretenders to a fair estate,  
Bequeathd by some Legators last intent;
(Such is our dying Saviours Testament:)  
The will is provd, is opend, and is read; 
The doubtfull heirs their diffring titles plead: 
All vouch the words their intrest to maintain, 
And each pretends by those his cause is plain.
Shall then the testament award the right? 
No, thats the Hungary for which they fight;  
The field of battel, subject of debate; 
The thing contended for, the fair estate. 
The sense is intricate, tis onely clear
What vowels and what consonants are there.  
Therefore tis plain, its meaning must be tryd 
Before some judge appointed to decide.  
Suppose, (the fair Apostate said,) I grant, 
The faithfull flock some living guide should want,
Your arguments an endless chase persue: 
Produce this vaunted Leader to our view,  
This mighty Moyses of the chosen crew.  
The Dame, who saw her fainting foe retird, 
With force renewd, to victory aspired;
(And looking upward to her kindred sky, 
As once our Saviour ownd his Deity,  
Pronouncd his wordsshe whom ye seek am I.)  
Nor less amazed this voice the Panther heard  
Than were those Jews to hear a god declard.
Then thus the matron modestly renewd;  
Let all your prophets and their sects be viewd,  
And see to which of em your selves think fit 
The conduct of your conscience to submit: 
Each Proselyte would vote his Doctor best,
With absolute exclusion to the rest:  
Thus woud your Polish Diet disagree, 
And end, as it began, in Anarchy; 
Your self the fairest for election stand, 
Because you seem crown-genral of the land;
But soon against your superstitious lawn  
Some Presbyterian Sabre woud be drawn: 
In your establishd laws of sovraignty 
The rest some fundamental flaw woud see, 
And call Rebellion gospel-liberty.
To church-decrees your articles require 
Submission modifyd, if not entire; 
Homage denyd, to censures you proceed; 
But when Curtana will not doe the deed, 
You lay that pointless clergy-weapon by,
And to the laws, your sword of justice fly. 
Now this your sects the more unkindly take, 
(Those prying varlets hit the blots you make) 
Because some ancient friends of yours declare,  
Your onely rule of faith the Scriptures are,
Interpreted, by men of judgment sound,  
Which evry sect will for themselves expound: 
Nor think less revrence to their doctours due  
For sound interpretation, than to you.  
If then, by able heads, are understood
Your brother prophets, who reformd abroad; 
Those able heads expound a wiser way, 
That their own sheep their shepherd shoud obey.  
But if you mean your selves are onely sound,  
That doctrine turns the reformation round,
And all the rest are false reformers found. 
Because in sundry Points you stand alone, 
Not in Communion joind with any one; 
And therefore must be all the Church, or none.  
Then, till you have agreed whose judge is best,
Against this forcd submission they protest:  
While sound and sound a different sense explains, 
Both play at hard-head till they break their brains:  
And from their Chairs each others force defy,  
While unregarded thunders vainly fly.
I pass the rest, because your Church alone  
Of all Usurpers best coud fill the Throne. 
But neither you, nor any sect beside  
For this high office can be qualifyd 
With necessary Gifts requird in such a Guide.
For that which must direct the whole must be  
Bound in one Bond of Faith and Unity: 
But all your sevral Churches disagree. 
The Consubstantiating Church and Priest 
Refuse Communion to the Calvinist;
The French reformd, from Preaching you restrain, 
Because you judge their Ordination vain;  
And so they judge of yours, but Donors must ordain. 
In short, in Doctrine, or in Discipline 
Not one reformd, can with another join:
But all from each, as from Damnation fly; 
No Union they pretend, but in Non-Popery. 
Nor, should their Members in a Synod meet,  
Coud any Church presume to mount the Seat  
Above the rest, their discords to decide;
None woud obey, but each would be the Guide: 
And face to face dissensions would encrease;  
For only distance now preserves the Peace.  
All in their Turns accusers and accusd,  
Babel was never half so much confusd.
What one can plead, the rest can plead as well; 
For amongst equals lies no last appeal, 
And all confess themselves are fallible.  
Now, since you grant some necessary Guide,  
All who can err are justly laid aside:
Because a trust so sacred to confer 
Shows want of such a sure Interpreter,  
And how can he be needful who can err?  
Then granting that unerring guide we want,  
That such there is you stand obliged to grant:
Our Saviour else were wanting to supply 
Our needs and obviate that Necessity. 
It then remains that Church can only be 
The guide which owns unfailing certainty; 
Or else you slip your hold, and change your side,
Relapsing from a necessary Guide. 
But this annexd Condition of the Crown,  
Immunity from Errours, you disown,  
Here then you shrink, and lay your weak pretensions down. 
For petty Royalties you raise debate;
But this unfailing Universal State  
You shun: nor dare succeed to such a glorious weight. 
And for that cause those Promises detest  
With which our Saviour did his Church invest: 
But strive t evade, and fear to find em true,
As conscious they were never meant to you:  
All which the mother church asserts her own,  
And with unrivalld claim ascends the throne. 
So when of old th Almighty Father sate 
In Council, to redeem our ruind state,
Millions of millions, at a distance round,  
Silent the sacred Consistory crownd, 
To hear what mercy mixt with Justice coud propound.  
All prompt with eager pity, to fulfil 
The full extent of their Creatours will:
But when the stern conditions were declard,  
A mournful whisper through the host was heard,  
And the whole hierarchy, with heads hung down,  
Submissively declind the pondrous profferd crown. 
Then, not till then, th eternal Son from high
Rose in the strength of all the Deity;  
Stood forth t accept the terms, and underwent  
A weight which all the frame of heavn had bent,  
Nor he Himself coud bear, but as omnipotent. 
Now, to remove the least remaining doubt,
That even the blear-eyd sects may find her out,  
Behold what heavenly rays adorn her brows,  
What from his Wardrobe her belovd allows 
To deck the wedding-day of his unspotted spouse.  
Behold what marks of Majesty she brings;
Richer than antient heirs of Eastern kings: 
Her right hand holds the sceptre and the keys,  
To show whom she commands, and who obeys: 
With these to bind or set the sinner free,  
With that t assert spiritual Royalty.
One in herself, not rent by Schism, but sound,  
Entire, one solid shining Diamond,  
Not Sparkles shattered into Sects like you, 
One is the Church, and must be to be true:  
One central principle of unity.
As undivided, so from errours free, 
As one in faith, so one in sanctity.  
Thus she, and none but she, th insulting Rage  
Of Hereticks opposd from Age to Age: 
Still when the Giant-brood invades her Throne,
She stoops from Heavn and meets em half way down, 
And with paternal Thunder vindicates her Crown. 
But like Egyptian Sorcerers you stand,  
And vainly lift aloft your Magick Wand  
To sweep away the Swarms of Vermin from the Land.
You coud like them, with like infernal Force 
Produce the Plague, but not arrest the Course.  
But when the Boils and Botches, with disgrace 
And publick Scandal sat upon the Face,  
Themselves attackd, the Magi strove no more,
They saw Gods Finger, and their Fate deplore;  
Themselves they coud not Cure of the dishonest sore. 
Thus one, thus pure, behold her largely spread  
Like the fair Ocean from her Mother-Bed;  
From East to West triumphantly she rides,
All Shoars are waterd by her wealthy Tides.  
The Gospel-sound, diffusd from Pole to Pole, 
Where winds can carry and where waves can roll. 
The self same doctrin of the Sacred Page  
Conveyd to evry clime, in evry age.
Here let my sorrow give my satyr place, 
To raise new blushes on my British race;  
Our sayling Ships like common shoars we use,  
And through our distant Colonies diffuse  
The draughts of Dungeons and the stench of stews,
Whom, when their home-bred honesty is lost, 
We disembogue on some far Indian coast; 
Thieves Pandars, Palliards, sins of evry sort; 
Those are the manufactures we export; 
And these the Missioners our zeal has made:
For, with my Countreys pardon be it said,  
Religion is the least of all our trade. 
Yet some improve their traffick more than we, 
For they on gain, their only God, rely: 
And set a publick price on piety.
Industrious of the needle and the chart,  
They run full sail to their Japponian Mart; 
Prevention fear, and prodigal of fame 
Sell all of Christian to the very name; 
Nor leave enough of that to hide their naked shame.
Thus of three marks, which in the Creed we view,  
Not one of all can be applyd to you: 
Much less the fourth; in vain alas you seek 
Th ambitious title of Apostolick:  
God-like descent! tis well your bloud can be
Provd noble in the third or fourth degree: 
For all of ancient that you had before, 
(I mean what is not borrowd from our store)  
Was Errour fulminated oer and oer.  
Old Heresies condemned in ages past,
By care and time recoverd from the blast.  
Tis said with ease, but never can be provd, 
The church her old foundations has removd, 
And built new doctrines on unstable sands:  
Judge that, ye winds and rains; you provd her, yet she stands.
Those ancient doctrines chargd on her for new, 
Shew when, and how, and from what hands they grew.  
We claim no powr, when Heresies grow bold, 
To coin new faith, but still declare the old. 
How else coud that obscene disease be purgd
When controverted texts are vainly urgd? 
To prove tradition new, theres somewhat more 
Requird, than saying, twas not usd before. 
Those monumental arms are never stirrd,  
Till Schism or Heresie call down Goliahs sword.
Thus, what you call corruptions, are in truth,  
The first plantations of the gospels youth,  
Old standard faith: but cast your eyes again, 
And view those errours which new sects maintain,  
Or which of old disturbd the churches peaceful reign;
And we can point each period of the time, 
When they began, and who begot the crime; 
Can calculate how long the eclipse endurd, 
Who interposd, what digits were obscurd:  
Of all which are already passd away,
We know the rise, the progress and decay. 
Despair at our foundations then to strike,  
Till you can prove your faith Apostolick; 
A limpid stream drawn from the native source; 
Succession lawfull in a lineal course.
Prove any Church, opposd to this our head, 
So one, so pure, so unconfindly spread,  
Under one chief of the spiritual state, 
The members all combind, and all subordinate.  
Show such a seamless coat, from schism so free,
In no communion joined with heresie:  
If such a one you find, let truth prevail:  
Till when, your weights will in the balance fail: 
A church unprincipld kicks up the scale. 
But if you cannot think (nor sure you can
Suppose in God what were unjust in man,)  
That he, the fountain of eternal grace, 
Should suffer falsehood for so long a space 
To banish truth and to usurp her place; 
That seavn successive ages should be lost
And preach damnation at their proper cost;  
That all your erring ancestours should die  
Drownd in the Abyss of deep Idolatry;  
If piety forbid such thoughts to rise,  
Awake, and open your unwilling eyes:
God has left nothing for each age undone, 
From this to that wherein he sent his Son:  
Then think but well of him, and half your work is done. 
See how his Church, adornd with evry grace, 
With open arms, a kind forgiving face,
Stands ready to prevent her long-lost sons embrace. 
Not more did Joseph oer his brethren weep, 
Nor less himself coud from discovery keep, 
When in the crowd of suppliants they were seen, 
And in their crew his best-beloved Benjamin.
That pious Joseph in the church behold, 
To feed your famine, and refuse your gold;  
The Joseph you exild, the Joseph whom you sold.  
Thus, while with heavnly charity she spoke,  
A streaming blaze the silent shadows broke;
Shot from the skyes; a cheerful azure light;  
The birds obscene to forests wingd their flight, 
And gaping graves receivd the wandring guilty spright.  
Such were the pleasing triumphs of the sky  
For James his late nocturnal victory;
The pledge of his Almighty patrons love, 
The fire-works which his angel made above.  
I saw myself the lambent easie light  
Gild the brown horrour and dispell the night; 
The messenger with speed the tidings bore;
News which three labring nations did restore;  
But heavns own Nuntius was arrived before. 
By this the Hind had reached her lonely cell, 
And vapours rose, and dews unwholesome fell,  
When she, by frequent observation wise,
As one who long on heavn had fixd her eyes. 
Discernd a change of weather in the skyes. 
The Western borders were with crimson spread, 
The moon descending lookd all flaming red; 
She thought good manners bound her to invite
The stranger Dame to be her guest that night. 
Tis true, coarse dyet and a short repast,  
(She said) were weak inducements to the tast  
Of one so nicely bred, and so unusd to fast; 
But what plain fare her cottage coud afford,
A hearty welcome at a homely board  
Was freely hers; and to supply the rest,  
An honest meaning, and an open breast.  
Last, with content of mind, the poor mans Wealth;  
A grace-cup to their common Patrons health.
This she desired her to accept, and stay, 
For fear she might be wilderd in her way,  
Because she wanted an unerring guide, 
And then the dew-drops on her silken hide 
Her tender constitution did declare,
Too Lady-like a long fatigue to bear, 
And rough inclemencies of raw nocturnal air.  
But most she feard that, travelling so late, 
Some evil-minded beasts might lye in wait,  
And without witness wreak their hidden hate.
The Panther, though she lent a listening ear, 
Had more of Lyon in her than to fear: 
Yet wisely weighing, since she had to deal  
With many foes, their numbers might prevail,  
Returned her all the thanks she could afford;
And took her friendly hostess at her word,  
Who entring first her lowly roof, (a shed  
With hoary moss and winding Ivy spread, 
Honest enough to hide an humble Hermits head,) 
Thus graciously bespoke her welcome guest:
So might these walls, with your fair presence blest,  
Become your dwelling-place of everlasting rest, 
Not for a night, or quick revolving year, 
Welcome an owner, not a sojourner.  
This peaceful Seat my poverty secures,
War seldom enters but where wealth allures  
Nor yet dispise it, for this poor aboad 
Has oft receivd and yet receives a god;  
A god, victorious of the stygian race,  
Here laid his sacred limbs, and sanctified the place.
This mean retreat did mighty Pan contain; 
Be emulous of him, and pomp disdain,  
And dare not to debase your soul to gain. 
The silent stranger stood amazd to see 
Contempt of wealth, and wilfull poverty:
And, though ill habits are not soon controlld, 
A while suspended her desire of gold. 
But civilly drew in her sharpnd paws,  
Not violating hospitable laws,  
And pacifyd her tail and lickd her frothy jaws.
The Hind did first her country Cates provide; 
Then couchd her self securely by her side.

MUCH malice mingld with a little wit 
Perhaps may censure this mysterious writ: 
Because the Muse has peopld Caledon  
With Panthers, Bears and Wolves, and beasts unknown,  
As if we were not stockd with monsters of our own.
Let sop answer, who has set to view, 
Such kinds as Greece and Phrygia never knew;  
And mother Hubbard in her homely dress  
Has sharply blamd a British Lioness, 
That Queen, whose feast the factious rabble keep,
Exposd obscenely naked and a-sleep.  
Led by those great examples, may not I  
The wanted organs of their words supply?  
If men transact like brutes, tis equal then  
For brutes to claim the privilege of men.
Others our Hind of folly will endite, 
To entertain a dangrous guest by night.  
Let those remember, that she cannot dye 
Till rolling time is lost in round eternity;  
Nor need she fear the Panther, though untamd,
Because the Lyons peace was now proclaimd;  
The wary salvage would not give offence,  
To forfeit the protection of her Prince;  
But watchd the time her vengeance to compleat, 
When all her furry sons in frequent Senate met.
Mean while she quenchd her fury at the floud 
And with a Lenten sallad coold her bloud.  
Their commons, though but course, were nothing scant, 
Nor did their minds an equal banquet want.  
For now the Hind, whose noble nature strove
T express her plain simplicity of love,  
Did all the honours of her house so well, 
No sharp debates disturbd the friendly meal. 
She turnd the talk, avoiding that extreme, 
To common dangers past, a sadly pleasing theam;
Remembering evry storm which tossd the state, 
When both were objects of the publick hate, 
And dropd a tear betwixt for her own childrens fate.  
Nor faild she then a full review to make 
Of what the Panther sufferd for her sake.
Her lost esteem, her truth, her loyal care, 
Her faith unshaken to an exild Heir, 
Her strength t endure, her courage to defy,  
Her choice of honourable infamy.  
On these prolixly thankfull, she enlargd,
Then with acknowledgments her self she chargd: 
For friendship of it self, an holy tye, 
Is made more sacred by adversity. 
Now should they part, malicious tongues woud say,  
They met like chance companions on the way,
Whom mutual fear of robbers had possessd;  
While danger lasted, kindness was professd;  
But that once oer, the short-livd union ends, 
The road divides, and there divide the friends. 
The Panther nodded when her speech was done,
And thanked her coldly in a hollow tone.  
But said, her gratitude had gone too far  
For common offices of Christian care. 
If to the lawfull Heir she had been true, 
She paid but Csar what was Csars due.
I might, she added, with like praise describe 
Your suffring sons, and so return your bribe;  
But incense from my hands is poorly prizd, 
For gifts are scornd where givers are despisd.  
I servd a turn, and then was cast away;
You, like the gawdy fly, your wings display,  
And sip the sweets, and bask in your Great Patrons day.  
This heard, the Matron was not slow to find 
What sort of malady had seizd her mind:  
Disdain, with gnawing envy, fell despight,
And cankerd malice stood in open sight:  
Ambition, intrest, pride without controul, 
And jealousie, the jaundice of the soul;  
Revenge, the bloudy minister of ill,  
With all the lean tormenters of the will.
Twas easie now to guess from whence arose  
Her new made union with her ancient foes. 
Her forcd civilities, her faint embrace, 
Affected kindness with an alterd face: 
Yet durst she not too deeply probe the wound,
As hoping still the nobler parts were sound;  
But strove with Anodynes t asswage the smart,  
And mildly thus her medcine did impart.  
Complaints of Lovers help to ease their pain; 
It shows a Rest of kindness to complain,
A friendship loth to quit its former hold,  
And conscious merit may be justly bold. 
But much more just your jealousie would show, 
If others good were injury to you:  
Witness ye heavns how I rejoice to see
Rewarded worth, and rising loyalty. 
Your Warrior Offspring that upheld the crown, 
The scarlet honours of your peacefull gown, 
Are the most pleasing objects I can find, 
Charms to my sight, and cordials to my mind:
When vertue spooms before a prosperous gale,  
My heaving wishes help to fill the sail;  
And if my prayrs for all the brave were heard, 
Csar should still have such, and such should still reward. 
The labourd earth your pains have sowd and tilld:
Tis just you reap the product of the field.  
Yours be the harvest, tis the beggars gain 
To glean the fallings of the loaded wain. 
Such scatterd ears as are not worth your care, 
Your charity for alms may safely spare,
And alms are but the vehicles of prayr.  
My daily bread is littrally implord,  
I have no barns nor granaries to hoard; 
If Csar to his own his hand extends, 
Say which of yours his charity offends:
You know, he largely gives, to more than are his friends. 
Are you defrauded when he feeds the poor? 
Our mite decreases nothing of your store; 
I am but few, and by your fare you see  
My crying sins are not of luxury.
Some juster motive sure your mind withdraws,  
And makes you break our friendships holy laws,  
For barefacd envy is too base a cause. 
Show more occasion for your discontent; 
Your love, the Wolf, woud help you to invent.
Some German quarrel, or, as times go now, 
Some French, where force is uppermost, will doe.  
When at the fountains head, as merit ought  
To claim the place, you take a swilling draught,  
How easie tis an envious eye to throw
And tax the sheep for troubling streams below;  
Or call her, (when no farther cause you find,)  
An enemy professd of all your kind!  
But then, perhaps, the wicked world woud think 
The Wolf designd to eat as well as drink.
This last allusion gauld the Panther more, 
Because indeed it rubbd upon the sore. 
Yet seemd she not to winch, though shrewdly paind:  
But thus her Passive character maintaind.  
I never grudgd, whateer my foes report,
Your flaunting fortune in the Lyons court. 
You have your day, or you are much belyd,  
But I am always on the suffring side:  
You know my doctrine, and I need not say  
I will not, but I cannot disobey.
On this firm principle I ever stood:  
He of my sons who fails to make it good,  
By one rebellious act renounces to my bloud.  
Ah, said the Hind, how many sons have you 
Who call you mother, whom you never knew!
But most of them who that relation plead  
Are such ungratious youths as wish you dead.  
They gape at rich revenues which you hold 
And fain would nible at your grandame gold  
Enquire into your years, and laugh to find;
Your crazy temper shows you much declind.  
Were you not dim, and doted, you might see  
A pack of cheats that claim a pedigree, 
No more of kin to you, than you to me.  
Do you not know that for a little coin
Heralds can foist a name into the line? 
They ask you blessing but for what you have,  
But once possessd of what with care you save,  
The wanton boyes woud piss upon your grave.  
Your sons of Latitude that court your grace,
Though most resembling you in form and face,  
Are far the worst of your pretended race. 
And, but I blush your honesty to blot:  
Pray God you prove em lawfully begot:  
For, in some Popish libells I have read,
The Wolf has been too busie in your bed;  
At least their hinder parts, the belly-piece, 
The paunch, and all that Scorpio claims are his.  
Their malice too a sore suspicion brings; 
For though they dare not bark, they snarl at kings;
Nor blame em for intruding in your line, 
Fat Bishopricks are still of right divine.  
Think you your new French Proselytes are come 
To starve abroad, because they starvd at home? 
Your benefices twinckld from afar,
They found the new Messiah by the star: 
Those Swisses fight on any side for pay,  
And tis the living that conforms, not they.  
Mark with what management their tribes divide,  
Some stick to you, and some to t other side
That many churches may for many mouths provide. 
More vacant pulpits woud more converts make; 
All woud have Latitude enough to take; 
The rest unbeneficd, your sects maintain 
For ordinations without cures are vain,
And chamber practice is a silent gain.  
Your sons of breadth at home, are much like these,  
Their soft and yielding metals run with ease; 
They melt, and take the figure of the mould:  
But harden, and preserve it best in gold.
Your Delphick sword, the Panther then replyd,  
Is double-edgd, and cuts on either side. 
Some sons of mine, who bear upon their shield,  
Three steeples Argent in a sable field, 
Have sharply taxd your converts, who unfed
Have followd you for miracles of bread;  
Such who themselves of no religion are, 
Allurd with gain, for any will declare.  
Bare lyes with bold assertions they can face, 
But dint of argument is out of place.
The grim Logician puts em in a fright, 
Tis easier far to flourish than to fight.  
Thus, our eighth Henrys marriage they defame;  
They say the schism of beds began the game, 
Divorcing from the Church to wed the Dame.
Though largely provd, and by himself professd 
That conscience, conscience would not let him rest: 
I mean, not till possessd of her he lovd, 
And old, uncharming Catherine was removd.  
For sundry years before did he complain,
And told his ghostly Confessour his pain. 
With the same impudence, without a ground,  
They say, that look the reformation round,  
No Treatise of Humility is found. 
But if none were, the Gospel does not want,
Our Saviour preachd it, and I hope you grant,  
The Sermon in the mount was Protestant: 
No doubt, replyd the Hind, as sure as all  
The writings of Saint Peter and Saint Paul. 
On that decision let it stand or fall.
Now for my converts, who you say unfed  
Have followd me for miracles of bread. 
Judge not by hear-say, but observe at least,  
If since their change, their loaves have been increast. 
The Lyon buyes no Converts, if he did,
Beasts woud be sold as fast as he coud bid. 
Tax those of intrest who conform for gain, 
Or stay the market of another reign.  
Your broad-way sons woud never be too nice 
To close with Calvin, if he paid their price;
But, raisd three steeples highr, woud change their note, 
And quit the Cassock for the Canting-coat.  
Now, if you damn this censure, as too bold, 
Judge by your selves, and think not others sold.  
Mean-time my sons accusd, by fames report
Pay small attendance at the Lyons court, 
Nor rise with early crowds, nor flatter late, 
(For silently they beg who daily wait.) 
Preferment is bestowd that comes unsought, 
Attendance is a bribe, and then tis bought.
How they shoud speed, their fortune is untryd,  
For not to ask, is not to be denied.  
For what they have their God and King they bless, 
And hope they shoud not murmur, had they less. 
But if reducd subsistence to implore,
In common prudence they woud pass your door. 
Unpittyd Hudibrass, your Champion friend,  
Has shown how far your charities extend.  
This lasting verse shall on his tomb be read, 
He shamd you living, and upbraids you dead.
With odious Atheist names you load your foes, 
Your libral Clergy why did I expose? 
It never fails in charities like those. 
In climes where true religion is professd, 
That imputation were no laughing jest,
But Imprimatur, with a Chaplains name, 
Is here sufficient licence to defame. 
What wonder ist that black detraction thrives? 
The Homicide of names is less than lives, 
And yet the perjurd murtherer survives.
This said, she pausd a little, and suppressd  
The boiling indignation of her breast;  
She knew the vertue of her blade, nor woud 
Pollute her satyr with ignoble bloud: 
Her panting foes she saw before her lye,
And back she drew the shining weapon dry  
So when the genrous Lyon has in sight  
His equal match, he rouses for the fight; 
But when his foe lyes prostrate on the plain, 
He sheathes his paws, uncurls his angry mane;
And, pleasd with bloudless honours of the day, 
Walks over and disdains th inglorious Prey.  
So JAMES, if great with less we may compare,  
Arrests his rowling thunder-bolts in air; 
And grants ungratefull friends a lengthnd space,
T implore the remnants of long suffring grace.  
This breathing-time the Matron took; and then,  
Resumd the thrid of her discourse agen.  
Be vengeance wholly left to powrs divine,  
And let heavn judge betwixt your sons and mine:
If joyes hereafter must be purchasd here 
With loss of all that mortals hold so dear, 
Then welcome infamy and publick shame,  
And, last, a long farewell to worldly fame. 
Tis said with ease, but oh, how hardly tryd
By haughty souls to humane honour tyd! 
O sharp convulsive pangs of agonizing pride!  
Down then, thou rebell, never more to rise, 
And what thou didst and dost so dearly prize, 
That fame, that darling fame, make that thy sacrifice.
Tis nothing thou hast givn; then add thy tears  
For a long race of unrepenting years  
Tis nothing yet; yet all thou hast to give:  
Then add those may-be years thou hast to live.  
Yet nothing still: then poor, and naked come,
Thy father will receive his unthrift home,  
And thy blest Saviours bloud discharge the mighty sum. 
Thus (she pursud) I discipline a son 
Whose uncheckd fury to revenge woud run:  
He champs the bit, impatient of his loss,
And starts a-side and flounders at the cross. 
Instruct him better, gracious God, to know, 
As thine is vengeance, so forgiveness too;  
That, suffring from ill tongues he bears no more 
Than what his Sovereign bears, and what his Saviour bore.
It now remains for you to school your child,  
And ask why Gods anointed he revild;  
A King and Princess dead! did Shimei worse? 
The cursers punishment should fright the curse:  
Your son was warnd, and wisely gave it ore,
But he who councelld him has paid the score: 
The heavy malice coud no higher tend,  
But woe to him on whom the weights descend: 
So to permitted ills the Dmon flys:  
His rage is aimd at him who rules the skyes;
Constraind to quit his cause, no succour found,  
The foe discharges evry Tyre around, 
In clouds of smoke abandoning the fight,  
But his own thundring peals proclaim his flight. 
In Henrys change his charge as ill succeeds;
To that long story little answer needs, 
Confront but Henrys words with Henrys deeds.  
Were space allowd, with ease it might be provd, 
What springs his blessed reformation movd. 
The dire effects appeard in open sight,
Which from the cause, he calls a distant flight 
And yet no larger leap than from the sun to light.  
Now last, your sons a double Pan sound,  
A Treatise of Humility is found.  
Tis found, but better had it neer been sought
Than thus in Protestant procession brought. 
The famd original through Spain is known,  
Rodriguez work, my celebrated son,  
Which yours by ill-translating made his own;  
Conceald its authour, and usurpd the name,
The basest and ignoblest theft of fame. 
My Altars kindld first that living coal; 
Restore, or practice better what you stole: 
That vertue could this humble verse inspire,  
Tis all the restitution I require.
Glad was the Panther that the charge was closd,  
And none of all her favrite sons exposd.  
For laws of arms permit each injurd man  
To make himself a saver where he can. 
Perhaps the plunderd merchant cannot tell
The names of Pirates in whose hands he fell:  
But at the den of thieves he justly flies,  
And evry Algerine is lawfull prize.  
No private person in the foes estate  
Can plead exemption from the publick fate.
Yet Christian laws allow not such redress;  
Then let the greater supersede the less.  
But let th Abbetors of the Panthers crime 
Learn to make fairer wars another time. 
Some characters may sure be found to write
Among her sons; for tis no common sight, 
A spotted Dam, and all her offspring white. 
The Salvage, though she saw her plea controlld,  
Yet woud not wholly seem to quit her hold, 
But offerd fairly to compound the strife;
And judge conversion by the converts life. 
Tis true, she said, I think it somewhat strange  
So few shoud follow profitable change; 
For present joys are more to flesh and bloud  
Than a dull prospect of a distant good.
Twas well alluded by a son of mine,  
(I hope to quote him is not to purloin;)  
Two magnets, heavn and earth, allure to bliss; 
The larger loadstone that, the nearer this: 
The weak attraction of the greater fails,
We nodd a-while, but neighbourhood prevails:  
But when the greater proves the nearer too, 
I wonder more your converts come so slow. 
Methinks in those who firm with me remain,  
It shows a nobler principle than gain.
Your infrence woud be strong (the Hind replyd) 
If yours were in effect the suffring side; 
Your clergy sons their own in peace possess,  
Nor are their prospects in reversion less.  
My Proselytes are struck with awfull dread,
Your bloudy Comet-laws hang blazing ore their head.  
The respite they enjoy but onely lent,  
The best they have to hope, protracted punishment.  
Be judge your self, if intrest may prevail,  
Which motives, yours or mine, will turn the scale.
While pride and pomp allure, and plenteous ease,  
That is, till mans predominant passions cease, 
Admire no longer at my slow encrease. 
By education most have been misled; 
So they believe, because they so were bred.
The Priest continues what the nurse began,  
And thus the child imposes on the man.  
The rest I namd before, nor need repeat; 
But intrest is the most prevailing cheat,  
The sly seducer both of age and youth;
They study that, and think they study truth:  
When intrest fortifies an argument,  
Weak reason serves to gain the wills assent;  
For souls, already warpd, receive an easie bent. 
Add long prescription of establishd laws,
And picque of honour to maintain a cause, 
And shame of change, and fear of future ill,  
And Zeal, the blind conductor of the will;  
And chief among the still mistaking crowd,  
The fame of teachers obstinate and proud,
And, more than all, the private Judge allowed.  
Disdain of Fathers which the daunce began,  
And last, uncertain whose the narrower span,  
The clown unread, and half-read gentleman.  
To this the Panther, with a scornfull smile:
Yet still you travail with unwearied toil,  
And range around the realm without controll 
Among my sons for proselytes to prole,  
And here and there you snap some silly soul.  
You hinted fears of future change in state,
Pray heavn you did not prophesie your fate;  
Perhaps you think your time of triumph near,  
But may mistake the season of the year; 
The Swallows fortune gives you cause to fear. 
For charity (replyd the Matron) tell
What sad mischance those pretty birds befell. 
Nay, no mischance, (the salvage Dame replyd,)  
But want of wit in their unerring guide,  
And eager haste and gaudy hopes and giddy pride.  
Yet, wishing timely warning may prevail,
Make you the moral, and Ill tell the tale. 
The Swallow, privilegd above the rest  
Of all the birds as mans familiar guest, 
Pursues the Sun in summer brisk and bold, 
But wisely shuns the persecuting cold:
Is well to chancels and to chimnies known,  
Though tis not thought she feeds on smoak alone. 
From hence she has been held of heavnly line,  
Endud with particles of soul divine. 
This merry Chorister had long possessd
Her summer seat, and featherd well her nest: 
Till frowning skys began to change their chear, 
And time turnd up the wrong side of the year;  
The shedding trees began the ground to strow  
With yellow leaves, and bitter blasts to blow.
Sad auguries of winter thence she drew, 
Which by instinct, or Prophecy, she knew: 
When prudence warnd her to remove betimes, 
And seek a better heavn and warmer clymes. 
Her sons were summond on a steeples height,
And, calld in common council, vote a flight; 
The day was namd, the next that shoud be fair,  
All to the genral rendezvous repair, 
They try their fluttring wings and trust themselves in air.  
But whether upward to the moon they go,
Or dream the winter out in caves below, 
Or hawk at flies elsewhere, concerns not us to know.  
Southwards, you may be sure, they bent their flight,  
And harbourd in a hollow rock at night;  
Next morn they rose, and set up evry sail;
The wind was fair, but blew a mackrel gale: 
The sickly young sat shivring on the shoar,  
Abhorrd salt-water never seen before,  
And prayd their tender mothers to delay  
The passage, and expect a fairer day.
With these the Martyn readily concurrd,  
A church-begot and church-believing bird; 
Of little body, but of lofty mind,  
Round bellyd, for a dignity designd,  
And much a dunce, as Martyns are by kind.
Yet often quoted Canon-laws and Code  
And Fathers which he never understood,  
But little learning needs in noble bloud. 
For, sooth to say, the Swallow brought him in,  
Her household Chaplain, and her next of kin.
In Superstition silly to excess,  
And casting Schemes, by planetary guess:  
In fine, shortwingd, unfit himself to fly, 
His fear foretold foul-weather in the sky.  
Besides, a Raven from a withered Oak,
Left of their lodging, was observed to croke. 
That omen likd him not, so his advice  
Was present safety, bought at any price:  
(A seeming pious care that covered cowardise.)  
To strengthen this, he told a boding dream,
Of rising waters and a troubld stream, 
Sure signs of anguish, dangers, and distress, 
With something more, not lawfull to express:  
By which he slyly seemed to intimate  
Some secret revelation of their fate.
For he concluded, once upon a time, 
He found a leaf inscribd with sacred rime, 
Whose antique characters did well denote  
The Sibyls hand of the Cuman Grott: 
The mad divineress had plainly writ,
A time should come (but many ages yet,) 
In which, sinister destinies ordain,  
A Dame should drown with all her featherd train, 
And seas from thence be called the Chelidonian main.  
At this, some shook for fear, the more devout
Arose, and blessd themselves from head to foot.  
Tis true, some stagers of the wiser sort 
Made all these idle wonderments their sport 
They said, their onely danger was delay,  
And he who heard what evry fool coud say,
Would never fix his thoughts, but trim his time away. 
The passage yet was good; the wind, tis true,  
Was somewhat high, but that was nothing new,  
Nor more than usual Equinoxes blew. 
The Sun (already from the scales declind)
Gave little hopes of better days behind,  
But change from bad to worse of weather and of wind.  
Nor need they fear the dampness of the Sky  
Should flag their wings, and hinder them to fly,  
Twas onely water thrown on sails too dry.
But, least of all, Philosophy presumes  
Of truth in dreams, from melancholy fumes;  
Perhaps the Martyn, housd in holy ground,  
Might think of Ghosts that walk their midnight round, 
Till grosser atoms tumbling in the stream
Of fancy, madly met and clubbd into a dream. 
As little weight his vain presages bear,  
Of ill effect to such alone who fear. 
Most prophecies are of a piece with these,  
Each Nostradamus can foretell with ease:
Not naming persons, and confounding times,  
One casual truth supports a thousand lying rimes. 
Th advice was true, but fear had seized the most,  
And all good counsel is on cowards lost.  
The question crudely put, to shun delay,
Twas carried by the major part to stay.  
His point thus gained, Sir Martyn dated thence  
His powr, and from a Priest became a Prince. 
He orderd all things with a busie care,  
And cells, and refectories did prepare,
And large provisions laid of winter fare. 
But now and then let fall a word or two 
Of hope, that heavn some miracle might show, 
And, for their sakes the sun should backward go;  
Against the laws of nature upward climb,
And, mounted on the Ram, renew the prime: 
For which two proofs in Sacred story lay, 
Of Ahaz dial and of Joshuahs day.  
In expectation of such times as these 
A chapel housd em, truly called of ease:
For Martyn much devotion did not ask, 
They prayd sometimes, and that was all their task. 
It happend (as beyond the reach of wit 
Blind prophecies may have a lucky hit)  
That this accomplishd, or at least in part,
Gave great repute to their new Merlins art.  
Some Swifts, the Gyants of the Swallow kind,  
Large limbd, stout-hearted, but of stupid mind,  
(For Swisses, or for Gibeonites designd,)  
These Lubbers, peeping through a broken pane,
To suck fresh air, surveyd the neighbouring plain; 
And saw (but scarcely could believe their eyes) 
New Blossoms flourish and new flowrs arise;  
As God had been abroad, and walking there 
Had left his foot-steps and reformd the year:
The sunny hills from far were seen to glow  
With glittering beams, and in the meads below 
The burnishd brooks appeard with liquid gold to flow. 
At last they heard the foolish Cuckow sing, 
Whose note proclaimd the holy-day of spring.
No longer doubting, all prepare to fly  
And repossess their patrimonial sky.  
The Priest before em did his wings display;  
And that good omens might attend their way, 
As luck woud have it, twas St. Martyns day.
Who but the Swallow now triumphs alone? 
The Canopy of heaven is all her own;  
Her youthfull offspring to their haunts repair; 
And glide along in glades, and skim in air, 
And dip for insects in the purling springs,
And stoop on rivers to refresh their wings. 
Their mothers think a fair provision made,  
That evry son can live upon his trade, 
And now the carefull charge is off their hands, 
Look out for husbands and new nuptial bands:
The youthfull widow longs to be supplyd; 
But first the lover is by Lawyers tyd  
To settle jointure-chimneys on the bride. 
So thick they couple, in so short a space,  
That Martyns marrage offerings rise apace;
Their ancient houses, running to decay, 
Are furbishd up and cemented with clay;  
They teem already; stores of eggs are laid, 
And brooding mothers call Lucinas aid. 
Fame spreads the news, and foreign fowls appear
In flocks to greet the new returning year,  
To bless the founder, and partake the cheer.  
And now twas time (so fast their numbers rise) 
To plant abroad, and people colonies; 
The youth drawn forth, as Martyn had desird
(For so their cruel destiny requird) 
Were sent far off on an ill fated day;  
The rest woud need conduct em on their way, 
And Martyn went, because he feard alone to stay. 
So long they flew with inconsiderate haste,
That now their afternoon began to waste;  
And, what was ominous, that very morn 
The Sun was entrd into Capricorn;  
Which, by their bad Astronomers account,  
That week the virgin balance shoud remount;
An infant moon eclipsd him in his way, 
And hid the small remainders of his day:  
The crowd amazd pursued no certain mark; 
But birds met birds, and justled in the dark; 
Few mind the publick in a Panick fright;
And fear increasd the horrour of the night.  
Night came, but unattended with repose; 
Alone she came, no sleep their eyes to close, 
Alone, and black she came, no friendly stars arose. 
What shoud they doe, beset with dangers round,
No neighbouring Dorp, no lodging to be found, 
But bleaky plains, and bare unhospitable ground?  
The latter brood, who just began to fly,  
Sick-feathered and unpractisd in the sky,  
For succour to their helpless mother call,
She spread her wings; some few beneath em craul, 
She spread em wider yet, but coud not cover all.  
T augment their woes, the winds began to move  
Debate in air, for empty fields above,  
Till Boreas got the skyes, and poured amain
His ratling hail-stones mixd with snow and rain. 
The joyless morning late arose and found  
A dreadfull desolation reign a-round, 
Some buried in the Snow, some frozen to the ground: 
The rest were strugling still with death, and lay
The Crows and Ravens rights, an undefended prey;  
Excepting Martyns race, for they and he  
Had gaind the shelter of a hollow tree,  
But soon discoverd by a sturdy clown,  
He headed all the rabble of a town,
And finished em with bats, or polld em down. 
Martyn himself was caught a-live, and tryd 
For treasnous crimes, because the laws provide 
No Martyn there in winter shall abide.  
High on an Oak which never leaf shall bear,
He breathd his last, exposed to open air,  
And there his corps, unblessd, is hanging still, 
To show the change of winds with his prophetick bill. 
The patience of the Hind did almost fail, 
For well she markd the malice of the tale:
Which Ribbald art their church to Luther owes,  
In malice it began, by malice grows,  
He sowed the Serpents teeth, an iron-harvest rose. 
But most in Martyns character and fate,  
She saw her slanderd sons, the Panthers hate,
The peoples rage, the persecuting state: 
Then said, I take th advice in friendly part,  
You clear your conscience, or at least your heart:  
Perhaps you faild in your fore-seeing skill, 
For Swallows are unlucky birds to kill:
As for my sons, the family is blessd,  
Whose every child is equal to the rest: 
No church reformd can boast a blameless line;  
Such Martyns build in yours, and more than mine:  
Or else an old fanatick Author lyes,
Who summd their Scandals up by Centuries.  
But through your parable I plainly see  
The bloudy laws, the crowds barbarity:  
The sun-shine that offends the purblind sight,  
Had some their wishes, it woud soon be night.
Mistake me not, the charge concerns not you,  
Your sons are male-contents, but yet are true.  
As far as non-resistance makes em so,  
But thats a word of neutral sense you know,  
A passive term, which no relief will bring,
But trims betwixt a rebell and a king.  
Rest well assured, the Pardelis replyd,  
My sons woud all support the regal side, 
Though heavn forbid the cause by battel should be tryd. 
The Matron answered with a loud Amen,
And thus pursud her argument agen. 
If, as you say, and as I hope no less,  
Your sons will practise what your self profess, 
What angry powr prevents our present peace?  
The Lyon, studious of our common good,
Desires (and Kings desires are ill withstood) 
To join our Nations in a lasting love;  
The barrs betwixt are easie to remove,  
For sanguinary laws were never made above.  
If you condemn that Prince of Tyranny
Whose mandate forced your Gallick friends to fly, 
Make not a worse example of your own, 
Or cease to rail at causeless rigour shown, 
And let the guiltless person throw the stone. 
His blunted sword, your suffring brotherhood
Have seldom felt, he stops it short of bloud: 
But you have ground the persecuting knife 
And set it to a razor edge on life. 
Cursd be the wit which cruelty refines 
Or to his fathers rod the Scorpion joins;
Your finger is more gross than the great Monarchs loins. 
But you perhaps remove that bloudy note,  
And stick it on the first Reformers coat. 
Oh let their crime in long oblivion sleep,  
Twas theirs indeed to make, tis yours to keep.
Unjust, or just, is all the question now, 
Tis plain, that not repealing you allow. 
To name the Test woud put you in a rage; 
You charge not that on any former age,  
But smile to think how innocent you stand
Armd by a weapon put into your hand. 
Yet still remember that you weild a sword 
Forgd by your foes against your Sovereign Lord.  
Designed to hew th imperial Cedar down,  
Defraud Succession and dis-heir the Crown.
T abhor the makers, and their laws approve,  
Is to hate Traytors and the treason love: 
What means it else, which now your children say,  
We made it not, nor will we take away?  
Suppose some great Oppressor had by slight
Of law, disseisd your brother of his right,  
Your common sire surrendring in a fright; 
Would you to that unrighteous title stand,  
Left by the villains will to heir the land?  
More just was Judas, who his Saviour sold;
The sacrilegious bribe he coud not hold, 
Nor hang in peace, before he rendrd back the gold. 
What more could you have done than now you doe, 
Had Oates and Bedlow, and their Plot been true? 
Some specious reasons for those wrongs were found;
The dire Magicians threw their mists around,  
And wise men walkd as on enchanted ground. 
But now when time has made th imposture plain, 
(Late though he followd truth, & limping held her train,)  
What new delusion charms your cheated eyes again?
The painted Harlot might a while bewitch, 
But why the Hag uncasd and all obscene with itch?  
The first Reformers were a modest race; 
Our Peers possessed in peace their native place:  
And when rebellious arms oreturned the state
They sufferd onely in the common fate; 
But now the Sovreign mounts the regal chair  
And mitrd seats are full, yet Davids bench is bare: 
Your answer is, they were not dispossessd, 
They need but rub their mettle on the Test
To prove their ore: twere well if gold alone 
Were touchd and tryd on your discerning stone;  
But that unfaithfull Test unfound will pass 
The dross of Atheists and sectarian brass:  
As if the experiment were made to hold
For base productions, and reject the gold:  
Thus men ungodded may to places rise, 
And sects may be preferrd without disguise:  
No danger to the church or state from these;  
The Papist onely has his Writ of ease.
No gainfull office gives him the pretence 
To grind the Subject or defraud the Prince. 
Wrong conscience, or no conscience may deserve  
To thrive, but ours alone is privilegd to sterve.  
Still thank your selves, you cry, your noble race
We banish not, but they forsake the place.  
Our doors are open: true, but eer they come, 
You toss your censing Test and fume the room; 
As if twere Tobys rival to expell,  
And fright the fiend who could not bear the smell.
To this the Panther sharply had replyd;  
But, having gaind a Verdict on her side, 
She wisely gave the loser leave to chide; 
Well satisfied to have the But and peace, 
And for the Plaintiffs cause she card the less,
Because she sud in form Pauperis; 
Yet thought it decent something shoud be said, 
For secret guilt by silence is betrayd:  
So neither granted all, nor much denyd,  
But answerd with a yawning kind of pride.
Methinks such terms of proferrd peace you bring, 
As once neas to th Italian King:  
By long possession all the land is mine,  
You strangers come with your intruding line 
To share my sceptre, which you call to join.
You plead like him an ancient Pedigree, 
And claim a peacefull seat by fates decree. 
In ready pomp your Sacrificer stands, 
To unite the Trojan and the Latin bands,  
And that the league more firmly may be tyd,
Demand the fair Lavinia for your bride. 
Thus plausibly you veil th intended wrong, 
But still you bring your exild gods along; 
And will endeavour in succeeding space, 
Those household Poppits on our hearths to place.
Perhaps some barbrous laws have been preferrd;  
I spake against the Test, but was not heard.  
These to rescind and Peerage to restore 
My gracious Sovreign woud my vote implore:  
I owe him much, but owe my conscience more.
Conscience is then your Plea, replied the Dame, 
Which well-informed will ever be the same.  
But yours is much of the Camelion hue,  
To change the dye with evry diffrent view.  
When first the Lyon sat with awfull sway,
Your conscience taught you duty to obey;  
He might have had your Statutes and your Test;  
No conscience but of subjects was professd.  
He found your temper, and no farther tryd, 
But on that broken reed your church relyd.
In vain the sects assayd their utmost art, 
With offered treasures to espouse their part, 
Their treasures were a bribe too mean to move his heart.  
But when by long experience you had proovd 
How far he coud forgive, how well he lovd;
A goodness that excelld his godlike race,  
And onely short of heavns unbounded grace: 
A floud of mercy that oerflowed our Isle,  
Calm in the rise, and fruitfull as the Nile,  
Forgetting whence your gypt was supplyd,
You thought your Sovreign bound to send the tide;  
Nor upward lookd on that immortal spring,  
But vainly deemd, he durst not be a king:  
Then conscience, unrestraind by fear, began  
To stretch her limits, and extend the span,
Did his indulgence as her gift dispose, 
And made a wise Alliance with her foes. 
Can conscience own th associating name,  
And raise no blushes to conceal her shame?  
For sure she has been thought a bashfull Dame.
But if the cause by battel should be tryd, 
You grant she must espouse the regal side:  
O Proteus Conscience, never to be tyd! 
What Phbus from the Tripod shall disclose, 
Which are in last resort, your friends or foes?
Homer, who learnd the language of the sky, 
The seeming Gordian knot woud soon unty; 
Immortal powrs the term of conscience know,  
But intrest is her name with men below.  
Conscience or intrest be t, or both in one;
(The Panther answered in a surly tone,) 
The first commands me to maintain the Crown,  
The last forbids to throw my barriers down. 
Our penal laws no sons of yours admit,  
Our Test excludes your Tribe from benefit.
These are my banks your ocean to withstand, 
Which proudly rising overlooks the land:  
And once let in, with unresisted sway 
Woud sweep the Pastors and their flocks away.  
Think not my judgment leads me to comply
With laws unjust, but hard necessity: 
Imperious need which cannot be withstood  
Makes ill authentick, for a greater good. 
Possess your soul with patience, and attend:  
A more auspicious Planet may ascend;
Good fortune may present some happier time, 
With means to cancel my unwilling crime;  
(Unwilling, witness all ye Powrs above)  
To mend my errours and redeem your love:  
That little space you safely may allow,
Your all-dispensing powr protects you now. 
Hold, said the Hind, tis needless to explain:  
You would postpone me to another reign: 
Till when you are content to be unjust, 
Your part is to possess, and mine to trust.
A fair exchange proposd of future chance,  
For present profit and inheritance: 
Few words will serve to finish our dispute, 
Who will not now repeal woud persecute;  
To ripen green revenge your hopes attend,
Wishing that happier Planet woud ascend: 
For shame let Conscience be your Plea no more,  
To will hereafter proves she might before;  
But shes a Bawd to gain, and holds the Door. 
Your care about your Banks, infers a fear
Of threatning Floods and Inundations near;  
If so, a just Reprise would only be 
Of what the Land usurped upon the Sea;  
And all your Jealousies but serve to show 
Your Ground is, like your Neighbour-Nation, low.
T intrench in what you grant unrighteous Laws  
Is to distrust the justice of your Cause; 
And argues that the true religion lyes  
In those weak Adversaries you despise.  
Tyrannick force is that which least you fear,
The sound is frightfull in a Christians ear: 
Avert it, Heavn; nor let that Plague be sent 
To us from the dispeopled Continent.  
But Piety commands me to refrain; 
Those Prayrs are needless in this Monarchs Reign.
Behold! how he protects your Friends opprest, 
Receives the Banishd, succours the Distressd: 
Behold, for you may read an honest open breast. 
He stands in Day-light, and disdains to hide  
An Act to which by Honour he is tyd,
A generous, laudable, and Kingly Pride. 
Your Test he would repeal, his Peers restore, 
This when he says he means, he means no more. 
Well, said the Panther, I believe him just, 
And yet
      And yet, tis but because you must,
You would be trusted, but you would not trust.  
The Hind thus briefly; and disdained t inlarge 
On Powr of Kings, and their Superiour charge,  
As Heavns Trustees before the Peoples choice: 
Tho sure the Panther did not much rejoyce
To hear those Echos given of her once Loyal voice. 
The Matron wood her Kindness to the last,  
But coud not win; her hour of Grace was past.  
Whom, thus persisting, when she could not bring 
To leave the Woolf and to believe her King,
She gave Her up, and fairly wished her Joy  
Of her late Treaty with her new Ally: 
Which well she hopd woud more successfull prove,  
Than was the Pigeons and the Buzzards love. 
The Panther askd what concord there coud be
Betwixt two kinds whose Natures disagree? 
The Dame replyd, Tis sung in evry Street,  
The common chat of Gossips when they meet:  
But, since unheard by you, tis worth your while  
To take a wholesome Tale, though told in homely stile.
A plain good Man, whose Name is understood, 
(So few deserve the name of Plain and Good) 
Of three fair lineal Lordships stood possessd, 
And livd, as reason was, upon the best.  
Inurd to hardships from his early Youth,
Much had he done and suffered for his truth:  
At Land, and Sea, in many a doubtfull Fight,  
Was never known a more adventrous Knight,  
Who oftner drew his Sword, and always for the right.  
As fortune woud (his fortune came tho late)
He took Possession of his just Estate;  
Nor rackd his Tenants with increase of Rent, 
Nor livd too sparing, nor too largely spent; 
But overlookd his Hinds, their Pay was just  
And ready, for he scornd to go on trust:
Slow to resolve, but in performance quick;  
So true, that he was awkward at a trick.  
For little Souls on little shifts rely, 
And coward Arts of mean Expedients try: 
The noble Mind will dare do anything but lye.
False friends, (his deadliest foes,) could find no way  
But shows of honest bluntness, to betray; 
That unsuspected plainness he believd; 
He looked into Himself, and was deceivd. 
Some lucky Planet sure attends his Birth,
Or Heavn would make a Miracle on Earth;  
For prosprous Honesty is seldom seen 
To bear so dead a weight, and yet to win; 
It looks as Fate with Natures Law would strive,  
To show Plain-dealing once an age may thrive:
And, when so tough a frame she could not bend,  
Exceeded her Commission to befriend.  
This gratefull man, as Heaven encreasd his Store,  
Gave God again, and daily fed his Poor; 
His House with all convenience was purveyd;
The rest he found, but raisd the Fabrick where he prayd;  
And in that Sacred Place his beauteous Wife 
Employd Her happiest hours of Holy Life. 
Nor did their Alms extend to those alone  
Whom common Faith more strictly made their own;
A sort of Doves were housd too near their Hall,  
Who cross the Proverb, and abound with Gall.  
Tho some, tis true, are passively inclind, 
The greater Part degenerate from their kind;  
Voracious Birds, that hotly Bill and breed,
And largely drink, because on Salt they feed. 
Small Gain from them their Bounteous Owner draws; 
Yet, bound by Promise, he supports their Cause, 
As Corporations priviledgd by Laws.  
That House, which harbour to their kind affords,
Was built, long since, God knows, for better Birds; 
But fluttring there, they nestle near the Throne,  
And lodge in Habitations not their own, 
By their high Crops, and Corny Gizzards known.  
Like Harpys, they could scent a plenteous board;
Then, to be sure, they never faild their Lord. 
The rest was form, and bare Attendance paid,  
They drunk, and eat, and grudgingly obeyd. 
The more they fed, they ravend still for more, 
They draind from Dan, and left Beersheba poor;
All this they had by Law, and none repind, 
The prefrence was but due to Levis Kind,  
But when some Lay-preferment fell by chance 
The Gourmands made it their Inheritance.  
When once possessd they never quit their Claim,
For then tis sanctifyd to Heavns high Name;  
And Hallowd thus, they cannot give Consent,  
The Gift should be prophand by Worldly management. 
Their Flesh was never to the Table served;  
Tho tis not thence inferrd the Birds were starvd;
But that their Master did not like the Food,  
As rank, and breeding Melancholy Blood. 
Nor did it with His Gracious Nature suite,  
Evn though they were not Doves, to persecute:  
Yet He refused, (nor could they take Offence)
Their Glutton Kind should teach him abstinence. 
Nor Consecrated Grain their Wheat he thought, 
Which, new from treading, in their Bills they brought:  
But left his Hinds, each in his Private Powr,  
That those who like the Bran might leave the Flowr.
He for himself, and not for others chose, 
Nor would He be imposd on, nor impose; 
But in their Faces His Devotion paid, 
And Sacrifice with Solemn Rites was made, 
And Sacred Incense on his Altars laid.
Besides these jolly Birds, whose Crops impure 
Repaid their Commons with their Salt Manure,  
Another Farm he had behind his House, 
Not overstockt, but barely for his use;  
Wherein his poor Domestick poultry Fed
And from His Pious Hands received their Bread.  
Our pamperd Pigeons with malignant Eyes  
Beheld these Inmates and their Nurseries: 
Tho hard their fare, at Evning and at Morn, 
A Cruise of Water and an Ear of Corn,
Yet still they grudgd that Modicum, and thought  
A Sheaf in evry single Grain was brought;  
Fain would they filch that little Food away,  
While unrestraind those happy Gluttons prey. 
And much they grievd to see so nigh their Hall
The Bird that warned St. Peter of his Fall; 
That he should raise his miterd Crest on high, 
And clap his Wings and call his Family  
To Sacred Rites; and vex th Etherial Powrs  
With midnight Mattins at uncivil Hours:
Nay more, his quiet Neighbours should molest, 
Just in the sweetness of their Morning rest.  
Beast of a bird, supinely when he might 
Lye snugg and sleep, to rise before the light:  
What if his dull Forefathers used that cry,
Coud he not let a Bad Example dye? 
The World was fallen into an easier way;  
This Age knew better, than to Fast and Pray.  
Good Sense in Sacred Worship would appear 
So to begin, as they might end the year.
Such feats in former times had wrought the falls  
Of crowing Chanticleers in Cloysterd Walls.  
Expelld for this and for their Lands, they fled; 
And Sister Partlet, with her hooded head  
Was hooted hence, because she would not pray a-Bed.
The way to win the restiff World to God 
Was to lay by the Disciplining Rod, 
Unnatural Fasts, and Foreign Forms of Prayr; 
Religion frights us with a meen severe. 
Tis Prudence to reform her into Ease,
And put Her in Undress, to make Her pleas;  
A lively Faith will bear aloft the Mind 
And leave the Luggage of Good Works behind. 
Such Doctrines in the Pigeon-house were taught; 
You need not ask how wondrously they wrought;
But sure the common Cry was all for these,  
Whose Life, and Precept both encouragd Ease. 
Yet fearing those alluring Baits might fail,  
And Holy Deeds ore all their Arts prevail, 
(For Vice, tho frontless and of hardend Face,
Is daunted at the sight of awfull Grace,) 
An hideous Figure of their Foes they drew 
Nor Lines, nor Looks, nor Shades, nor Colours true; 
And this Grotesque design, exposd to Publick view. 
One would have thought it some gyptian Piece,
With Garden-Gods, and barking Deities,  
More thick than Ptolomey has stuck the Skies. 
All so perverse a Draught, so far unlike, 
It was no Libell where it meant to strike:  
Yet still the daubing pleasd, and Great and Small
To view the Monster crowded Pigeon-hall.  
There Chanticleer was drawn upon his knees, 
Adoring Shrines, and Stocks of Sainted Trees; 
And by him a mishapen, ugly Race; 
The curse of God was seen on evry face.
No Holland emblem could that Malice mend, 
But still the worse the look the fitter for a Fiend.  
The Master of the Farm, displeasd to find  
So much of Rancour in so mild a kind, 
Enquird into the Cause, and came to know,
The Passive Church had struck the foremost blow:  
With groundless Fears, and Jealousies possest,  
As if this troublesome intruding Guest  
Would drive the Birds of Venus from their Nest. 
A Deed his inborn Equity abhorrd,
But Intrest will not trust, tho God should plight his Word.  
A Law, the Source of many Future harms, 
Had banishd all the Poultry from the Farms;  
With loss of Life, if any should be found 
To crow or peck on this forbidden Ground.
That Bloody Statute chiefly was designd  
For Chanticleer the white, of Clergy kind;  
But after-malice did not long forget  
The Lay that wore the Robe and Coronet. 
For them, for their Inferiours and Allyes,
Their Foes a deadly Shibboleth devise:  
By which unrighteously it was decreed,  
That none to Trust, or Profit should succeed, 
Who would not swallow first a poysonous wicked Weed;  
Or that to which old Socrates was curst,
Or Henbane-Juice to swellem till they burst. 
The Patron (as in reason) thought it hard 
To see this Inquisition in his Yard,  
By which the Soveraign was of Subjects use debarred.  
All gentle means he tryd, which might withdraw
Th Effects of so unnatural a Law:  
But still the Dove-house obstinately stood  
Deaf to their own, and to their Neighbours good:  
And which was worse, (if any worse could be)  
Repented of their boasted Loyalty:
Now made the Champions of a cruel Cause,  
And drunk with Fumes of Popular Applause; 
For those whom God to ruine has designd, 
He fits for Fate, and first destroys their Mind.  
New Doubts indeed they daily strove to raise,
Suggested Dangers, interposd Delays; 
And Emissary Pigeons had in store,  
Such as the Meccan Prophet usd of yore,  
To whisper Counsels in their Patrons Ear; 
And veild their false Advice with Zealous Fear.
The Master smiled to see em work in vain,  
To wear him out and make an idle reign: 
He saw, but sufferd their Protractive Arts,  
And strove by mildness to reduce their Hearts;  
But they abused that Grace to make Allyes
And fondly closd with former Enemies;  
For fools are double Fools, endeavring to be wise. 
After a grave Consult what course were best,  
One, more mature in Folly than the rest,  
Stood up, and told em with his head aside,
That desprate Cures must be to desprate Ills applyd: 
And therefore, since their main impending fear  
Was from th encreasing race of Chanticleer:  
Some Potent Bird of Prey they ought to find,  
A Foe professd to him and all his kind:
Some haggard Hawk, who had her eyry nigh,  
Well pouncd to fasten, and well wingd to fly; 
One they might trust, their common wrongs to wreak: 
The Musquet, and the Coystrel were too weak,  
Too fierce the Falcon, but, above the rest,
The noble Buzzard ever pleasd me best; 
Of small Renown, tis true; for, not to lye,  
We call him but a Hawk by courtesie.  
I know he haunts the Pigeon-house and Farm, 
And more, in time of War has done us harm;
But all his hate on trivial Points depends, 
Give up our Forms, and we shall soon be friends.  
For Pigeons flesh he seems not much to care;  
Cramd Chickens are a more delicious fare;  
On this high Potentate, without delay,
I wish you would conferr the Sovereign sway;  
Petition him t accept the Government,  
And let a splendid Embassy be sent. 
This pithy speech prevaild; and all agreed,  
Old Enmitys forgot, the Buzzard should succeed.
Their welcom Suit was granted soon as heard,  
His Lodgings furnishd, and a Train prepard, 
With Bs upon their Breast, appointed for his Guard.  
He came, and Crownd with great Solemnity,  
God save King Buzzard, was the genrall cry.
A Portly Prince, and goodly to the sight, 
He seemd a Son of Anach for his height:  
Like those whom stature did to Crowns prefer; 
Black-browd and bluff, like Homers Jupiter; 
Broad-backed and Brawny built for Loves delight,
A Prophet formd to make a female Proselyte.  
A Theologue more by need, than genial bent, 
By Breeding sharp, by Nature confident, 
Intrest in all his Actions was discernd;  
More lernd than Honest, more a Wit than learnd.
Or forcd by Fear, or by his Profit led,  
Or both conjoynd, his Native clime he fled:  
But brought the Vertues of his Heavn along;  
A fair Behaviour, and a fluent Tongue.  
And yet with all his Arts he could not thrive;
The must unlucky Parasite alive.  
Loud Praises to prepare his Paths he sent,  
And then himself pursud his Compliment!  
But, by reverse of Fortune chacd away, 
His Gifts no longer than their Author stay;
He shakes the Dust against th ungrateful race, 
And leaves the stench of Ordures in the place.  
Oft has he flatterd, and blasphemd the same,  
For in his Rage, he spares no Sovrains name: 
The Hero, and the Tyrant change their style
By the same measure that they frown or smile; 
When well receivd by hospitable Foes,  
The kindness he returns, is to expose:  
For Courtesies, tho undeservd and great,  
No gratitude in Fellon-minds beget;
As tribute to his Wit, the churl receives the treat.  
His praise of Foes is venomously Nice,  
So touchd, it turns a Vertue to a Vice:  
A Greek, and bountiful forewarns us twice.  
Sevn sacraments he wisely dos disown,
Because he knows Confession stands for one; 
Where sins to sacred silence are conveyd,  
And not for Fear, or Love, to be betrayd:  
But he, uncalld, his Patron to controul, 
Divulgd the secret whispers of his Soul;
Stood forth th accusing Sathan of his Crimes,  
And offerd to the Moloch of the Times.  
Prompt to assayle, and careless of defence, 
Invulnerable in his Impudence,  
He dares the World, and, eager of a name,
He thrusts about, and justles into fame.  
Frontless and Satyr-proof, he scowrs the streets,  
And runs an Indian muck at all he meets.  
So fond of loud Report, that not to miss  
Of being known (his last and utmost bliss)
He rather would be known, for what he is. 
Such was and is the Captain of the test,  
Tho half his Vertues are not here expresst; 
The modesty of Fame conceals the rest.  
The spleenful Pigeons never could create
A Prince more proper to revenge their hate; 
Indeed, more proper to revenge, than save;  
A King, whom in his wrath, th Almighty gave: 
For all the Grace the Landlord had allowd  
But made the Buzzard and the Pigeons proud,
Gave time to fix their Friends, and to seduce the Crowd.  
They long their Fellow-Subjects to inthrall,  
Their Patrons promise into question call, 
And vainly think he meant to make em Lords of all. 
False Fears their Leaders faild not to suggest,
As if the Doves were to be dispossesst;  
Nor Sighs nor Groans nor gogling Eyes did want, 
For now the Pigeons too had learned to Cant.  
The House of Prayr is stockd with large encrease; 
Nor Doors, nor Windows can contain the Press:
For Birds of evry feather fill th abode;  
Evn Atheists out of envy own a God:  
And, reeking from the Stews, Adultrers come, 
Like Goths and Vandals to demolish Rome.  
That Conscience, which to all their Crimes was mute,
Now calls aloud, and cryes to Persecute.  
No rigour of the Laws to be releasd, 
And much the less, because it was their Lords request:  
They thought it great their Sovrain to controul, 
And namd their Pride, Nobility of Soul.
Tis true, the Pigeons and their Prince Elect 
Were short of Powr their purpose to effect:  
But with their quills, did all the hurt they coud, 
And cuffd the tender Chickens from their food: 
And much the Buzzard in their Cause did stir,
Tho naming not the Patron, to infer, 
With all respect, He was a gross Idolater.  
But when th Imperial owner did espy  
That thus they turnd his Grace to villany, 
Not suffring wrath to discompose his mind,
He strove a temper for th extreams to find,  
So to be just, as he might still be kind. 
Then, all maturely weighd, pronouncd a Doom 
Of Sacred Strength for evry Age to come. 
By this the Doves their Wealth and State possess,
No Rights infringd, but Licence to oppress:  
Such Powr have they as Factious Lawyers long 
To Crowns ascribd, that Kings can do no wrong. 
But, since his own Domestick Birds have tryd 
The dire Effects of their destructive Pride,
He deems that Proof a Measure to the rest,  
Concluding well within his Kingly Breast  
His Fowl of Nature too unjustly were opprest. 
He therefore makes all Birds of evry Sect  
Free of his Farm, with promise to respect
Their sevral Kinds alike, and equally protect. 
His Gracious Edict the same Franchise yields  
To all the wild Encrease of Woods and Fields, 
And who in Rocks aloof, and who in Steeples builds. 
To Crows the like Impartial Grace affords,
And Choughs and Daws, and such Republick Birds: 
Securd with ample Priviledge to feed,  
Each has his District, and his Bounds decreed:  
Combind in common Intrest with his own, 
But not to pass the Pigeons Rubicon.
Here ends the Reign of this pretended Dove; 
All Prophecies accomplishd from above, 
For Shiloh comes the Scepter to remove. 
Reducd from Her Imperial High Abode, 
Like Dyonysius to a private Rod,
The Passive Church, that with pretended Grace 
Did Her distinctive Mark in duty place, 
Now Touchd, Reviles her Maker to his Face. 
What after happend is not hard to guess; 
The small Beginnings had a large Encrease,
And Arts and Wealth succeed (the secret spoils of Peace.) 
Tis said the Doves repented, tho too late 
Become the Smiths of their own Foolish Fate:  
Nor did their Owner hasten their ill hour:  
But, sunk in Credit, they decreasd in Powr:
Like Snows in warmth that mildly pass away, 
Dissolving in the Silence of Decay. 
The Buzzard, not content with equal place,  
Invites the featherd Nimrods of his Race,  
To hide the thinness of their Flock from Sight,
And all together make a seeming, goodly Flight: 
But each have seprate Interests of their own;  
Two Czars, are one too many for a throne. 
Nor can th usurper long abstain from Food, 
Already he has tasted Pigeons Blood:
And may be tempted to his former fare,  
When this Indulgent Lord shall late to Heavn repair. 
Bare benting times, and moulting Months may come, 
When lagging late, they cannot reach their home:  
Or Rent in schism, (for so their Fate decrees,)
Like the Tumultuous Colledge of the Bees; 
They fight their Quarrel, by themselves opprest;  
The Tyrant smiles below, and waits the falling feast. 
Thus did the gentle Hind her fable end, 
Nor would the Panther blame it, nor commend;
But, with affected Yawnings at the close, 
Seemd to require her natural repose. 
For now the streaky light began to peep;  
And setting stars admonishd both to sleep. 
The Dame withdrew, and wishing to her Guest
The peace of Heavn, betook her self to rest. 
Ten thousand Angels on her slumbers waite 
With glorious Visions of her future state.

**
Britannia Rediviva: A Poem on the Birth of a Prince
***

Our Vows are heard betimes! and Heaven takes care 
To grant, before we can conclude the Prayr:  
Preventing angels met it half the way,  
And sent us back to Praise, who came to Pray. 
Just on the Day, when the high mounted Sun
Did farthest in his Northern Progress run,  
He bended forward and evn stretched the Sphere 
Beyond the limits of the lengthend year; 
To view a Brighter Sun in Britaine Born;  
That was the Busness of his longest Morn,
The Glorious Object seen, twas time to turn. 
Departing Spring coud only stay to shed  
Her bloomy beauties on the Genial Bed,  
But left the manly Summer in her sted,  
With timely Fruit the longing Land to chear
And to fulfill the promise of the year. 
Betwixt two Seasons comes th Auspicious Heir,  
This Age to blossom, and the next to bear.  
Last solemn Sabbath saw the Church attend,  
The Paraclete in fiery Pomp descend;
But when his wondrous Octave rowld again,  
He brought a Royal Infant in his Train, 
So great a Blessing to so good a King 
None but th Eternal Comforter coud bring. 
Or did the Mighty Trinity conspire,
As once, in Council to Create our Sire? 
It seems as if they sent the New-Born Guest 
To wait on the Procession of their feast; 
And on their Sacred Anniverse decreed  
To stamp their Image on the promisd Seed.
Three Realms united, and on One bestowd  
An Emblem of their Mystick Union showd:  
The Mighty Trine the Triple Empire shard,  
As every Person woud have One to guard.  
Hail, son of Prayrs! by holy Violence
Drawn down from Heavn; but long be banishd thence,  
And late to thy Paternal Skyes retire:  
To mend our Crimes whole Ages woud require,  
To change th inveterate habit of our Sins, 
And finish what thy Godlike Sire begins.
Kind Heavn, to make us English-Men again,  
No less can give us than a Patriarchs Reign.  
The Sacred Cradle to your Charge receive  
Ye Seraphs, and by turns the Guard relieve; 
Thy Fathers Angel and Thy Father joyn
To keep Possession, and secure the Line;  
But long defer the Honours of thy Fate, 
Great may they be like his, like his be late, 
That James this running Century may view, 
And give his Son an Auspice to the New.
Our wants exact at least that moderate stay:  
For see the Dragon winged on his way, 
To watch the Travail and devour the Prey. 
Or, if Allusions may not rise so high,  
Thus, when Alcides raisd his Infant Cry,
The Snakes besiegd his Young Divinity: 
But vainly with their forked Tongues they threat; 
For Opposition makes a Heroe Great. 
To needful Succour all the good will run; 
And Jove assert the Godhead of his Son.
O still repining at your present state, 
Grudging your selves the Benefits of Fate,  
Look up, and read in Characters of Light  
A Blessing sent you in your own Despight. 
The Manna falls, yet that Clestial Bread
Like Jews you munch, and murmure while you feed.  
May not your Fortune be like theirs, Exild,  
Yet forty Years to wander in the Wild:  
Or if it be, may Moses live at least  
To lead you to the Verge of promisd Rest!
Tho Poets are not Prophets, to foreknow  
What Plants will take the Blite, and what will grow,  
By tracing Heavn his Footsteps may be found; 
Behold! how awfully He walks the round! 
God is abroad, and, wondrous in his ways,
The Rise of Empires, and their Fall surveys;  
More (might I say) than with an usual eye,  
He sees his bleeding Church in Ruine lye, 
And hears the Souls of Saints beneath his Altar cry.  
Already has He lifted high, the Sign,
Which Crownd the Conquering Arms of Constantine: 
The Moon grows pale at that presaging sight,  
And half her Train of Stars have lost their Light.  
Behold another Sylvester, to bless  
The Sacred Standard, and secure Success;
Large of his Treasures, of a Soul so great  
As fills and crowds his Universal Seat. 
Now view at home a second Constantine; 
(The former too, was of the Brittish line)  
Has not his healing Balm your Breaches closd,
Whose Exile many sought, and few opposd? 
Or did not Heavn by its Eternal Doom 
Permit those Evils, that this Good might come?  
So manifest, that evn the Moon-eyd Sects  
See Whom and What this Providence protects.
Methinks, had we within our Minds no more 
Than that One Shipwrack on the Fatal Ore,  
That only thought may make us think again,  
What Wonders God reserves for such a Reign. 
To dream that Chance his Preservation wrought,
Were to think Noah was preservd for nought;  
Or the surviving Eight were not designd  
To people Earth, and to restore their Kind. 
When humbly on the Royal Babe we gaze,  
The Manly Lines of a Majestick face
Give awful joy: Tis Paradise to look 
On the fair Frontispiece of Natures Book;  
If the first opening Page so charms the sight,  
Think how th unfolded Volume will delight! 
See how the Venerable Infant lyes
In early Pomp; how through the Mothers Eyes  
The Fathers Soul with an undaunted view  
Looks out, and takes our Homage as his due. 
See on his future Subjects how He smiles, 
Nor meanly flatters, nor with craft beguiles;
But with an open face, as on his Throne,  
Assures our Birthrights and assumes his own.  
Born in broad Day-light, that th ungrateful Rout 
May find no room for a remaining doubt: 
Truth, which it self is light, does darkness shun,
And the true Eaglet safely dares the Sun. 
Fain woud the Fiends have made a dubious birth, 
Loth to confess the Godhead cloathed in Earth.  
But sickned after all their baffled lyes, 
To find an Heir apparent of the Skyes:
Abandond to despair, still may they grudge,  
And, owning not the Saviour, prove the Judge. 
Not Great neas stood in plainer Day,  
When, the dark mantling Mist dissolvd away,  
He to the Tyrians shewd his sudden face,
Shining with all his Goddess Mothers Grace:  
For She her self had made his Countnance bright, 
Breathd honour on his eyes, and her own Purple Light.  
If our Victorious Edward, as they say, 
Gave Wales a Prince on that Propitious Day,
Why may not Years revolving with his Fate 
Produce his Like, but with a longer Date? 
One who may carry to a distant shore  
The Terrour that his Famd Forefather bore. 
But why shoud James or his Young Hero stay
For slight Presages of a Name or Day? 
We need no Edwards Fortune to adorn  
That happy moment when our Prince was born: 
Our Prince adorns his Day, and Ages hence 
Shall wish his Birth-day for some future Prince.
Great Michael, Prince of all th therial Hosts,  
And what ere In-born Saints our Britain boasts;  
And thou, th adopted Patron of our Isle,  
With chearful Aspects on this Infant smile: 
The Pledge of Heavn, which dropping from above
Secures our Bliss and reconciles his Love.  
Enough of Ills our dire Rebellion wrought,  
When, to the Dregs, we drank the bitter draught;  
Then airy Atoms did in Plagues conspire,  
Nor did th avenging Angel yet retire,
But purgd our still encreasing Crimes with Fire. 
Then perjurd Plots, the still impending Test,  
And worse; but Charity conceals the Rest: 
Here stop the Current of the sanguine flood;  
Require not, Gracious God, thy Martyrs Blood;
But let their dying pangs, their living toyl, 
Spread a Rich harvest through their Native Soil:  
A Harvest ripening for another Reign, 
Of which this Royal Babe may reap the Grain.  
Enough of Early Saints one womb has givn;
Enough encreasd the Family of Heavn:  
Let them for his and our Attonement go; 
And Reigning blest above, leave him to Rule below.  
Enough already has the Year foreslowd 
His wonted Course, the Seas have overflowd,
The Meads were floated with a weeping Spring, 
And frightend birds in Woods forgot to sing; 
The Strong-limbd Steed beneath his harness faints, 
And the same shivring sweat his Lord attaints. 
When will the Minister of Wrath give ore?
Behold him; at Araunahs threshing-floor.  
He stops, and seems to sheathe his flaming brand; 
Pleasd with burnt Incense, from our Davids hand.  
David has bought the Jebusites abode, 
And raisd an Altar to the Living God.
Heavn, to reward him, make his Joys sincere; 
No future Ills, nor Accidents appear  
To sully and pollute the Sacred Infants Year. 
Five Months to Discord and Debate were givn: 
He sanctifies the yet remaining Sevn.
Sabbath of Months! henceforth in Him be blest,  
And prelude to the Realms perpetual Rest! 
Let his Baptismal Drops for us attone;  
Lustrations for Offences not his own.  
Let Conscience, which is Intrest ill disguisd,
In the same Font be cleansd, and all the Land Baptizd.  
Un-namd as yet; at least unknown to Fame: 
Is there a strife in Heavn about his Name? 
Where every Famous Predecessour vies, 
And makes a Faction for it in the Skies?
Or must it be reservd to thought alone?  
Such was the Sacred Tetragrammaton.  
Things worthy silence must not be reveald: 
Thus the true Name of Rome was kept conceald, 
To shun the Spells, and Sorceries of those
Who durst her Infant Majesty oppose.  
But when his tender strength in time shall rise 
To dare ill Tongues, and fascinating eyes;  
This Isle, which hides the little Thundrers Fame, 
Shall be too narrow to contain his Name:
Th Artillery of Heavn shall make him known; 
Crete could not hold the God, when Jove was grown. 
As Joves Increase, who from his Brain was born,  
Whom Arms and Arts did equally adorn, 
Free of the Breast was bred, whose milky taste
Minervas Name to Venus had debasd;  
So this Imperial Babe rejects the Food  
That mixes Monarchs with Plebeian blood:  
Food that his inborn Courage might controul,  
Extinguish all the Father in his Soul,
And for his Estian Race, and Saxon Strain,  
Might re-produce some second Richards Reign. 
Mildness he shares from both his Parents blood: 
But Kings too tame are despicably good: 
Be this the Mixture of this Regal Child,
By Nature Manly, but by Virtue Mild.  
Thus far the Furious Transport of the News  
Had to Prophetick Madness fird the Muse; 
Madness ungovernable, uninspird, 
Swift to foretel whatever she desird;
Was it for me the dark Abyss to tread,  
And read the Book which Angels cannot read? 
How was I punishd when the sudden blast 
The Face of Heavn and our young Sun orecast!  
Fame, the swift Ill, encreasing as she rowld,
Disease, Despair, and Death at three reprises told: 
At three insulting strides she stalkd the Town,  
And, like Contagion, struck the Loyal down. 
Down fell the winnowd Wheat; but mounted high, 
The Whirl-wind bore the Chaff, and hid the Sky.
Here black Rebellion shooting from below, 
(As Earths Gigantick brood by moments grow) 
And here the Sons of God are petrifyd with Woe:  
An Appoplex of Grief! so low were drivn  
The Saints, as hardly to defend their Heavn.
As, when pent Vapours run their hollow round, 
Earth-quakes, which are Convulsions of the ground,  
Break bellowing forth, and no Confinement brook,  
Till the Third settles what the Former shook; 
Such heavings had our Souls; till, slow and late,
Our life with his returnd, and Faith prevaild on Fate.  
By Prayers the mighty Blessing was implord,  
To Prayrs was granted, and by Prayrs restord.  
So ere the Shunamite a Son conceivd, 
The Prophet promisd, and the Wife believd;
A Son was sent, the Son so much desird,  
But soon upon the Mothers Knees expird. 
The troubled Seer approachd the mournful Door, 
Ran, prayed, and sent his Pastral-Staff before,  
Then stretchd his Limbs upon the Child, and mournd,
Till Warmth, and breath, and a new Soul returnd. 
Thus Mercy stretches out her hand, and saves  
Desponding Peter sinking in the Waves.  
As when a sudden Storm of Hail and Rain 
Beats to the ground the yet unbearded Grain.
Think not the hopes of Harvest are destroyd  
On the flat Field, and on the naked void; 
The light unloaded stem, from tempest freed, 
Will raise the youthful honours of his head;  
And, soon restord by native vigour, bear
The timely product of the bounteous Year. 
Nor yet conclude all fiery Trials past, 
For Heavn will exercise us to the last;  
Sometimes will check us in our full carreer,  
With doubtful blessings, and with mingled fear;
That, still depending on his daily Grace, 
His every mercy for an alms may pass; 
With sparing hands will Dyet us to good;  
Preventing Surfeits of our pampered blood.  
So feeds the Mother-bird her craving young
With little Morsels, and delays em long. 
True, this last blessing was a Royal Feast, 
But wheres the Wedding Garment on the Guest? 
Our Manners, as Religion were a Dream,  
Are such as teach the Nations to Blaspheme.
In Lusts we wallow, and with Pride we swell,  
And Injuries, with Injuries repell; 
Prompt to Revenge, not daring to forgive, 
Our Lives unteach the Doctrine we believe;  
Thus Israel Sind, impenitently hard,
And vainly thought the present Ark their Guard;  
But when the haughty Philistims appear, 
They fled abandoned to their Foes and fear; 
Their God was absent, though his Ark was there. 
Ah! lest our Crimes shoud snatch this Pledge away,
And make our Joys the blessing of a day!  
For we have sind him hence, and that he lives. 
God to his promise, not our practice, gives.  
Our Crimes woud soon weigh down the guilty Scale,  
But James, and Mary, and the Church prevail.
Nor Amaleck can rout the Chosen Bands, 
While Hur and Aaron hold up Moses hands.  
By living well, let us secure his days; 
Modrate in hopes, and humble in our ways.  
No force the Free-born Spirit can constrain,
But Charity, and great Examples gain. 
Forgiveness is our thanks, for such a day;  
Tis Godlike God in his own Coyn to pay.  
But you, Propitious Queen, translated here  
From your mild Heavn to rule our rugged Sphere,
Beyond the Sunny walks and circling Year. 
You, who your Native Clymate have bereft  
Of all the Virtues, and the Vices left; 
Whom Piety, and Beauty make their boast,  
Though Beautiful is well in Pious lost;
So lost as Star-light is dissolvd away,  
And melts into the brightness of the day, 
Or Gold about the Regal Diadem, 
Lost to improve the lustre of the Gem.  
What can we add to your Triumphant Day?
Let the Great Gift the beautious Giver pay; 
For shoud our thanks awake the rising Sun, 
And lengthen, as his latest shadows run,  
That, tho the longest day, woud soon, too soon, be done.  
Let Angels voices with their harps conspire,
But keep th auspicious Infant from the Quire;  
Late let him sing above, and let us know  
No sweeter Musick than his Cryes below. 
Nor can I wish to you, Great Monarch, more  
Than such an annual Income to your store;
The Day which gave this Unit, did not shine 
For a less Omen, than to fill the Trine.  
After a Prince, an Admiral beget, 
The Royal Sovraign wants an Anchor yet.  
Our Isle has younger Titles still in store,
And when th exhausted Land can yield no more,  
Your Line can force them from a Foreign shore.  
The Name of Great your Martial mind will suit;  
But Justice is your Darling Attribute: 
Of all the Greeks, twas but one Heros due,
And, in him, Plutarch Prophecyd of you.  
A Princes favours but on few can fall, 
But Justice is a Virtue shard by all.  
Some Kings the name of Conqrors have assumd,  
Some to be Great, some to be Gods presumd;
But boundless powr and arbitrary Lust  
Made Tyrants still abhor the Name of Just;  
They shund the praise this Godlike Virtue gives, 
And feard a Title that reproachd their Lives. 
The Powr from which all Kings derive their state,
Whom they pretend, at least, to imitate,  
Is equal both to punish and reward; 
For few woud love their God, unless they feard. 
Resistless Force and Immortality  
Make but a Lame, Imperfect Deity;
Tempests have force unbounded to destroy, 
And Deathless Being evn the Damnd enjoy,  
And yet Heavns Attributes both last and first, 
One without life, and one with life accurst;  
But Justice is Heavns self, so strictly He
That coud it fail, the God-head coud not be.  
This Virtue is your own; but Life and State 
Are One to Fortune subject, One to Fate:  
Equal to all, you justly frown or smile,  
Nor Hopes, nor Fears your steady Hand beguile;
Your self our Ballance hold, the Worlds our Isle.

**
Palamon and Arcite: or the Knight's Tale
***

In Days of old, there livd, of mighty Fame 
A valiant Prince; and Theseus was his Name: 
A Chief, who more in Feats of Arms excelld 
The Rising nor the Setting Sun beheld.  
Of Athens he was Lord; much Land he won,
And added Foreign Countrys to his Crown.  
In Scythia with the Warriour Queen he strove, 
Whom first by Force he conquerd, then by Love; 
He brought in Triumph back the beauteous Dame,  
With whom her Sister, fair Emilia, came.
With Honour to his Home let Theseus ride, 
With Love to Friend, and Fortune for his Guide, 
And his victorious Army at his Side.  
I pass their warlike Pomp, their proud Array, 
Their Shouts, their Songs, their Welcome on the Way:
But, were it not too long, I would recite 
The Feats of Amazons, the fatal Fight 
Betwixt the hardy Queen and Heroe Knight. 
The Town besiegd, and how much Blood it cost 
The Female Army, and th Athenian Host;
The Spousals of Hippolita the Queen;  
What Tilts, and Turneys at the Feast were seen; 
The Storm at their Return, the Ladies Fear: 
But these and other Things I must forbear.  
The Field is spacious I design to sow,
With Oxen far unfit to draw the Plow: 
The Remnant of my Tale is of a length 
To tire your Patience, and to waste my Strength;  
And trivial Accidents shall be forborn, 
That others may have time to take their Turn;
As was at first enjoind us by mine Host: 
That he whose Tale is best, and pleases most, 
Should win his Supper at our common Cost. 
And therefore where I left, I will pursue 
This ancient Story, whether false or true,
In hope it may be mended with a new.  
The Prince I mentiond, full of high Renown,  
In this Array drew near th Athenian Town;  
When, in his Pomp and utmost of his Pride,  
Marching, he chancd to cast his Eye aside,
And saw a Quire of mourning Dames, who lay  
By Two and Two across the common Way: 
At his Approach they raisd a rueful Cry, 
And beat their Breasts, and held their Hands on high, 
Creeping and crying, till they seizd at last
His Coursers Bridle and his Feet embracd.  
Tell me, said Theseus, what and whence you are, 
And why this Funeral Pageant you prepare? 
Is this the Welcome of my worthy Deeds, 
To meet my Triumph in Ill-omend Weeds?
Or envy you my Praise, and would destroy  
With Grief my Pleasures, and pollute my Joy?  
Or are you injurd, and demand Relief?  
Name your Request, and I will ease your Grief.  
The most in Years of all the Mourning Train
Began; (but sounded first away for Pain)  
Then scarce recoverd, spoke: Nor envy we 
Thy great Renown, nor grudge thy Victory; 
Tis thine, O King, th Afflicted to redress,  
And Fame has filld the World with thy Success:
We wretched Women sue for that alone, 
Which of thy Goodness is refusd to none: 
Let fall some Drops of Pity on our Grief, 
If what we beg be just, and we deserve Relief:  
For none of us, who now thy Grace implore,
But held the Rank of Sovereign Queen before;  
Till, thanks to giddy Chance, which never bears 
That Mortal Bliss should last for length of Years,  
She cast us headlong from our high Estate,  
And here in hope of thy Return we wait:
And long have waited in the Temple nigh,  
Built to the gracious Goddess Clemency. 
But revrence thou the Powr whose Name it bears, 
Relieve th Oppressed, and wipe the Widows Tears. 
I, wretched I, have other Fortune seen,
The Wife of Capaneus, and once a Queen: 
At Thebes he fell; cursd be the fatal Day! 
And all the rest thou seest in this Array,  
To make their Moan their Lords in Battel lost,  
Before that Town besiegd by our Confedrate Host:
But Creon, old and impious, who commands  
The Theban City, and usurps the Lands,  
Denies the Rites of Funral Fires to those  
Whose breathless Bodies yet he calls his Foes.  
Unburnd, unburyd, on a Heap they lie;
Such is their Fate, and such his Tyranny; 
No Friend has leave to bear away the Dead,  
But with their Lifeless Limbs his Hounds are fed. 
At this she shriekd aloud, the mournful Train  
Echod her Grief, and grovling on the Plain,
With Groans, and Hands upheld, to move his Mind,  
Besought his Pity to their helpless Kind! 
The Prince was touchd, his Tears began to flow,  
And, as his tender Heart would break in two,  
He sighd; and could not but their Fate deplore,
So wretched now, so fortunate before. 
Then lightly from his lofty Steed he flew,  
And raising one by one the suppliant Crew,  
To comfort each, full solemnly he swore,  
That by the Faith which Knights to Knighthood bore,
And what eer else to Chivalry belongs, 
He would not cease, till he revengd their Wrongs:  
That Greece should see performd what he declard,  
And cruel Creon find his just Reward. 
He said no more, but shunning all Delay
Rode on; nor enterd Athens on his Way; 
But left his Sister and his Queen behind, 
And wavd his Royal Banner in the Wind: 
Where in an Argent Field the God of War 
Was drawn triumphant on his Iron Carr;
Red was his Sword, and Shield, and whole Attire,  
And all the Godhead seemd to glow with Fire; 
Evn the Ground glitterd where the Standard flew,  
And the green Grass was dyd to sanguine Hue. 
High on his pointed Lance his Pennon bore
His Cretan Fight, the conquerd Minotaure:  
The Soldiers shout around with generous Rage, 
And in that Victory, their own presage. 
He praisd their Ardour, inly pleasd to see  
His Host, the Flowr of Grecian Chivalry.
All Day he marchd; and all th ensuing Night;  
And saw the City with returning Light.  
The Process of the War I need not tell, 
How Theseus conquerd, and how Creon fell:  
Or after, how by Storm the Walls were won,
Or how the Victor sackd and burnd the Town; 
How to the Ladies he restord again 
The Bodies of their Lords in Battel slain;  
And with what ancient Rites they were interrd; 
All these to fitter time shall be deferrd:
I spare the Widows Tears, their woful Cries,  
And Howling at their Husbands Obsequies;  
How Theseus at these Funrals did assist, 
And with what Gifts the mourning Dames dismissd. 
Thus when the Victor Chief had Creon slain,
And conquerd Thebes, he pitchd upon the Plain 
His mighty Camp, and when the Day returnd, 
The Country wasted and the Hamlets burnd;  
And left the Pillagers, to Rapine bred, 
Without Controul to strip and spoil the Dead.
There, in a Heap of Slain, among the rest 
Two youthful Knights they found beneath a Load oppressd  
Of slaughterd Foes, whom first to Death they sent, 
The Trophies of their Strength, a bloody Monument.  
Both fair, and both of Royal Blood they seemd,
Whom Kinsmen to the Crown the Heralds deemd; 
That Day in equal Arms they fought for Fame;  
Their Swords, their Shields, their Surcoats were the same.  
Close by each other laid they pressd the Ground, 
Their manly Bosoms piercd with many a griesly Wound;
Nor well alive nor wholly dead they were, 
But some faint Signs of feeble Life appear: 
The wandring Breath was on the Wing to part,  
Weak was the Pulse, and hardly heavd the Heart.  
These two were Sisters Sons; and Arcite one,
Much famd in Fields, with valiant Palamon. 
From These their costly Arms the Spoilers rent, 
And softly both conveyd to Theseus Tent: 
Whom, known of Creons Line and curd with Care,  
He to his City sent as Prisners of the War,
Hopeless of Ransom, and condemnd to lie  
In Durance, doomd a lingring Death to die. 
This done, he marchd away with warlike Sound,  
And to his Athens turnd with Laurels crownd,  
Where happy long he livd, much lovd, and more renownd.
But in a Towr, and never to be loosd. 
The woful captive Kinsmen are enclosd. 
Thus Year by Year they pass, and Day by Day,  
Till once (twas on the Morn of chearful May) 
The young Emilia, fairer to be seen
Than the fair Lilly on the Flowry Green, 
More fresh than May her self in Blossoms new, 
(For with the rosie Colour strove her Hue)  
Wakd, as her Custom was, before the Day, 
To do th Observance due to sprightly May:
For sprightly May commands our Youth to keep  
The Vigils of her Night, and breaks their sluggard Sleep: 
Each gentle Breast with kindly Warmth she moves;  
Inspires new Flames, revives extinguishd Loves.  
In this Remembrance Emily eer day
Arose, and dressd her self in rich Array;  
Fresh as the Month, and as the Morning fair:  
Adown her Shoulders fell her Length of Hair:  
A Ribband did the braided Tresses bind, 
The rest was loose, and wantond in the Wind:
Aurora had but newly chasd the Night,  
And purpld oer the Sky with blushing Light, 
When to the Garden-walk she took her way, 
To sport and trip along in Cool of Day, 
And offer Maiden Vows in Honour of the May.
At evry Turn she made a little Stand,  
And thrust among the Thorns her Lilly hand  
To draw the Rose; and evry Rose she drew 
She shook the Stalk, and brushd away the Dew:  
Then party-colourd Flowrs of white and red
She wove, to make a Garland for her Head  
This done, she sung and carolld out so clear 
That Men and Angels might rejoice to hear 
Evn wondring Philomel forgot to sing,  
And learnd from Her to welcome in the Spring.
The Towr, of which before was mention made,  
Within whose Keep the captive Knights were laid,  
Built of a large Extent, and strong withal, 
Was one Partition of the Palace Wall: 
The Garden was enclosd within the Square
Where young Emilia took the Morning-Air.  
It happend Palamon, the Prisner Knight, 
Restless for Woe, arose before the Light, 
And with his Jaylors leave desird to breathe  
An Air more wholesom than the Damps beneath.
This granted, to the Towr he took his way, 
Cheerd with the Promise of a glorious Day: 
Then cast a languishing Regard around,  
And saw with hateful Eyes the Temples crownd 
With golden Spires, and all the Hostile Ground.
He sighd, and turned his Eyes, because he knew 
Twas but a larger Jayl he had in view: 
Then lookd below, and from the Castles height  
Beheld a nearer and more pleasing Sight;  
The Garden, which before he had not seen,
In Springs new Livery clad of White and Green, 
Fresh Flowrs in wide Parterres, and shady Walks between. 
This viewd, but not enjoyd, with Arms across  
He stood, reflecting on his Countrys Loss; 
Himself an Object of the Publick Scorn,
And often wishd he never had been born.  
At last (for so his Destiny requird) 
With walking giddy, and with thinking tird,  
He thro a little Window cast his Sight,  
Tho thick of Bars, that gave a scanty Light:
But evn that Glimmering servd him to descry 
Th inevitable Charms of Emily. 
Scarce had he seen, but, seizd with sudden Smart,  
Stung to the Quick, he felt it at his Heart;  
Struck blind with overpowering Light he stood,
Then started back amazd, and cryd aloud.  
Young Arcite heard; and up he ran with haste, 
To help his Friend, and in his Arms embracd; 
And askd him why he lookd so deadly wan,  
And whence, and how, his change of Cheer began?
Or who had done th offence? But if, said he, 
Your Grief alone is hard Captivity; 
For Love of Heavn, with Patience undergo 
A cureless Ill, since Fate will have it so: 
So stood our Horoscope in Chains to lie,
And Saturn in the Dungeon of the Sky, 
Or other baleful Aspect, ruld our Birth, 
When all the friendly Stars were under Earth: 
Whateer betides, by Destiny tis done; 
And better bear like Men, than vainly seek to shun,
Nor of my bonds, said Palamon again,  
Nor of unhappy Planets I complain;  
But when my mortal Anguish causd my Cry, 
The Moment I was hurt thro either Eye; 
Piercd with a Random-shaft, I faint away,
And perish with insensible Decay: 
A Glance of some new Goddess gave the Wound,  
Whom, like Acteon, unaware I found. 
Look how she walks along yon shady Space; 
Not Juno moves with more Majestick Grace,
And all the Cyprian Queen is in her face. 
If thou art Venus, (for thy Charms confess  
That Face was formd in Heaven) nor art thou less;  
Disguisd in Habit, undisguisd in Shape, 
O help us Captives from our Chains to scape;
But if our Doom be past in Bonds to lie 
For Life, and in a loathsom Dungeon die;  
Then be thy Wrath appeasd with our Disgrace, 
And show Compassion to the Theban Race, 
Oppressd by Tyrant Powr! While yet he spoke,
Arcite on Emily had fixd his Look; 
The fatal Dart a ready Passage found, 
And deep within his Heart infixd the Wound:  
So that if Palamon were wounded sore, 
Arcite was hurt as much as he, or more:
Then from his inmost Soul he sighd, and said,  
The Beauty I behold has struck me dead: 
Unknowingly she strikes, and kills by chance; 
Poyson is in her Eyes, and Death in evry Glance. 
O, I must ask; nor ask alone, but move
Her Mind to Mercy, or must die for Love.  
Thus Arcite: And thus Palamon replies,  
(Eager his Tone, and ardent were his Eyes.) 
Speakst thou in earnest, or in jesting Vein? 
Jesting, said Arcite, suits but ill with Pain.
It suits far worse, (said Palamon again,  
And bent his Brows) with Men who Honour weigh,  
Their Faith to break, their friendship to betray; 
But worst with Thee, of Noble Lineage born, 
My Kinsman, and in Arms my Brother sworn.
Have we not plighted each our holy Oath,  
That one shoud be the Common Good of both? 
One Soul shoud both inspire, and neither prove 
His Fellows Hindrance in pursuit of Love? 
To this before the Gods we gave our Hands,
And nothing but our Death can break the Bands.  
This binds thee, then, to farther my Design,  
As I am bound by Vow to farther thine:  
Nor canst, nor darst thou, Traytor, on the Plain 
Appeach my Honour, or thy own maintain,
Since thou art of my Council, and the Friend  
Whose Faith I trust, and on whose Care depend:  
And wouldst thou court my Ladies Love, which I 
Much rather than release, would chuse to die? 
But thou, false Arcite, never shalt obtain,
Thy bad Pretence; I told thee first my Pain:  
For first my Love began eer thine was born;  
Thou, as my Council, and my Brother sworn,  
Art bound tassist my Eldership of Right, 
Or justly to be deemd a perjurd Knight.
Thus Palamon: But Arcite with disdain 
In haughty Language thus replyd again: 
Forsworn thy self: The Traytors odious Name  
I first return, and then disprove thy Claim.  
If Love be Passion, and that Passion nurst
With strong Desires, I lovd the Lady first.  
Canst thou pretend Desire, whom Zeal inflamd 
To worship, and a Powr Clestial namd?  
Thine was Devotion to the Blest above,  
I saw the Woman, and desird her Love;
First ownd my Passion, and to thee commend 
Th important Secret, as my chosen Friend.  
Suppose (which yet I grant not) thy Desire  
A Moment elder than my Rival Fire;  
Can Chance of seeing first thy Title prove?
And knowst thou not, no Law is made for Love?  
Law is to Things which to free Choice relate; 
Love is not in our Choice, but in our Fate: 
Laws are but positive: Loves Powr we see 
Is Natures Sanction, and her first Decree.
Each Day we break the Bond of Humane Laws 
For Love, and vindicate the Common Cause. 
Laws for Defence of Civil Rights are placd,  
Love throws the Fences down, and makes a general Waste: 
Maids, Widows, Wives, without distinction fall;
The sweeping Deluge, Love, comes on and covers all. 
If then the Laws of Friendship I transgress,  
I keep the Greater, while I break the Less; 
And both are mad alike, since neither can possess.  
Both hopeless to be ransomd, never more
To see the Sun, but as he passes oer.  
Like Esops Hounds contending for the Bone, 
Each pleaded Right, and woud be lord alone;  
The fruitless Fight continud all the Day,  
A Cur came by and snatchd the Prize away.
As Courtiers therefore justle for a Grant,  
And when they break their Friendship, plead their Want, 
So thou, if Fortune will thy Suit advance,  
Love on; nor envy me my equal Chance: 
For I must love, and am resolvd to try
My Fate, or failing in th Adventure die. 
Great was their Strife, which hourly was renewd, 
Till each with mortal Hate his Rival viewd:  
Now Friends no more, nor walking Hand in Hand;  
But when they met, they made a surly Stand;
And glard like angry Lions as they passd, 
And wishd that every Look might be their last. 
It chancd at length, Perithous came t attend  
This worthy Theseus, his familiar Friend: 
Their Love in early Infancy began,
And rose as Childhood ripend into Man. 
Companions of the War; and lovd so well, 
That when one dyd, as ancient Stories tell,  
His Fellow to redeem him went to Hell.  
But to pursue my Tale; to welcome home
His Warlike Brother, is Perithous come: 
Arcite of Thebes was known in Arms long since,  
And honourd by this young Thessalian Prince. 
Theseus, to gratifie his Friend and Guest,  
Who made our Arcites Freedom his Request,
Restord to Liberty the Captive Knight, 
But on these hard Conditions I recite:  
That if hereafter Arcite shoud be found  
Within the Compass of Athenian Ground,  
By Day or Night, or on whateer Pretence,
His Head shoud pay the Forfeit of th Offence. 
To this Perithous for his Friend agreed,  
And on his Promise was the Prisner freed.  
Unpleasd and pensive hence he takes his way, 
At his own Peril; for his Life must pay.
Who now but Arcite mourns his bitter Fate,  
Finds his dear Purchase, and repents too late?  
What have I gaind, he said, in Prison pent,  
If I but change my Bonds for Banishment?  
And banishd from her Sight, I suffer more
In Freedom than I felt in Bonds before; 
Forcd from her Presence and condemnd to live: 
Unwelcom Freedom and unthankd Reprieve:  
Heavn is not but where Emily abides, 
And where shes absent, all is Hell besides.
Next to my Day of Birth, was that accurst 
Which bound my Friendship to Perithous first: 
Had I not known that Prince, I still had been 
In Bondage, and had still Emilia seen:  
For tho I never can her Grace deserve,
Tis Recompense enough to see and serve.  
O Palamon, my Kinsman and my Friend,  
How much more happy Fates thy Love attend!  
Thine is th Adventure; thine the Victory:  
Well has thy Fortune turnd the Dice for thee:
Thou on that Angels Face maist feed thy Eyes, 
In Prison, no; but blissful Paradise! 
Thou daily seest that Sun of Beauty shine,  
And lovst at least in Loves extreamest Line. 
I mourn in Absence, Loves Eternal Night;
And who can tell but since thou hast her Sight, 
And art a comely, young, and valiant Knight,  
Fortune (a various Powr) may cease to frown, 
And by some Ways unknown thy Wishes crown:  
But I, the most forlorn of Humane Kind,
Nor Help can hope, nor Remedy can find; 
But doomd to drag my loathsom Life in Care,  
For my Reward, must end it in Despair.  
Fire, Water, Air, and Earth, and Force of Fates 
That governs all, and Heavn that all creates,
Nor Art, nor Natures Hand can ease my Grief;  
Nothing but Death, the Wretches last Relief:  
Then farewel Youth, and all the Joys that dwell 
With Youth and Life, and Life it self, farewell.  
But why, alas! do mortal Men in vain
Of Fortune, Fate, or Providence complain? 
God gives us what he knows our Wants require, 
And better Things than those which we desire: 
Some pray for Riches; Riches they obtain; 
But watchd by Robbers, for their Wealth are slain:
Some pray from Prison to be freed; and come 
When guilty of their Vows, to fall at home; 
Murderd by those they trusted with their Life, 
A favourd Servant, or a Bosom Wife.  
Such dear-bought Blessings happen evry Day,
Because we know not for what Things to pray.  
Like drunken Sots about the Streets we roam 
Well knows the Sot he has a certain Home; 
Yet knows not how to find th uncertain Place,  
And blunders on, and staggers evry Pace.
Thus all seek Happiness; but few can find,  
For far the greater Part of Men are blind.  
This is my Case, who thought our utmost Good  
Was in one Word of Freedom understood:  
The fatal Blessing came: From Prison free,
I starve abroad, and lose the Sight of Emily. 
Thus Arcite: but if Arcite thus deplore 
His Suffrings, Palamon yet suffers more. 
For when he knew his Rival freed and gone,  
He swells with Wrath; he makes outrageous Moan:
He frets, he fumes, he stares, he stamps the Ground;  
The hollow Towr with Clamours rings around:  
With briny Tears he bathd his fetterd Feet, 
And droppd all oer with Agony of Sweat. 
Alas! he cryd, I, Wretch, in Prison pine,
Too happy Rival, while the Fruit is thine:  
Thou livst at large, thou drawst thy Native Air,  
Pleasd with thy Freedom, proud of my Despair:  
Thou mayst, since thou hast Youth and Courage joind,  
A sweet Behaviour, and a solid Mind,
Assemble ours, and all the Theban Race, 
To vindicate on Athens thy Disgrace;  
And after (by some Treaty made) possess 
Fair Emily, the Pledge of lasting Peace.  
So thine shall be the beauteous Prize, while I
Must languish in Despair, in Prison die.  
Thus all th Advantage of the Strife is thine,  
Thy portion double Joys, and double Sorrows mine. 
The Rage of Jealousie then fird his Soul,  
And his Face kindld like a burning Coal:
Now cold Despair, succeeding in her stead,  
To livid Paleness turns the glowing Red.  
His Blood scarce Liquid, creeps within his Veins, 
Like Water which the freezing Wind constrains.  
Then thus he said; Eternal Deities
Who rule the World with absolute Decrees, 
And write whatever Time shall bring to pass 
With Pens of Adamant on Plates of Brass;  
What is the Race of Humane Kind your Care 
Beyond what all his Fellow-Creatures are?
He with the rest is liable to Pain, 
And like the Sheep, his Brother-Beast, is slain.  
Cold, Hunger, Prisons, Ills without a Cure, 
All these he must, and guiltless oft, endure: 
Or does your Justice, Powr, or Prescience fail,
When the Good suffer and the Bad prevail? 
What worse to wretched Vertue could befall, 
If Fate, or giddy Fortune governd all? 
Nay, worse than other Beasts is our Estate: 
Them, to pursue their Pleasures you create;
We, bound by harder Laws, must curb our Will, 
And your Commands, not our Desires fulfil:  
Then when the Creature is unjustly slain, 
Yet, after Death at least, he feels no Pain;  
But Man in Life surchargd with Woe before,
Not freed when dead, is doomd to suffer more.  
A Serpent shoots his Sting at unaware;  
An ambushd Thief forelays a Traveller; 
The Man lies murderd, while the Thief and Snake, 
One gains the Thickets, and one thrids the Brake.
This let Divines decide; but well I know, 
Just, or unjust, I have my Share of Woe:  
Through Saturn seated in a luckless Place,  
And Junos Wrath, that persecutes my Race;  
Or Mars and Venus in a Quartil, move
My Pangs of Jealousie for Arcites Love.  
Let Palamon oppressd in Bondage mourn, 
While to his exild Rival we return.  
By this the Sun, declining from his Height, 
The Day had shortned to prolong the Night:
The lengthend Night gave length of Misery  
Both to the Captive Lover, and the Free:  
For Palamon in endless Prison mourns, 
And Arcite forfeits Life if he returns. 
The Banishd never hopes his Love to see,
Nor hopes the Captive Lord his Liberty: 
Tis hard to say who suffers greater Pains, 
One sees his Love, but cannot break his Chains: 
One free, and all his Motions uncontrould, 
Beholds whateer he woud, but what he woud behold.
Judge as you please, for I will haste to tell 
What Fortune to the banishd Knight befel.  
When Arcite was to Thebes returnd again, 
The Loss of her he lovd renewd his Pain;  
What could be worse than never more to see
His Life, his Soul, his charming Emily? 
He ravd with all the Madness of Despair, 
He roard, he beat his Breast, he tore his Hair.  
Dry Sorrow in his stupid Eyes appears,  
For wanting Nourishment, he wanted Tears:
His Eye-balls in their hollow Sockets sink, 
Bereft of Sleep; he loaths his Meat and Drink:  
He withers at his Heart, and looks as wan 
As the pale spectre of a murderd Man:  
That Pale turns Yellow, and his Face receives
The faded Hue of sapless Boxen Leaves;  
In solitary Groves he makes his Moan, 
Walks early out, and ever is alone. 
Nor mixd in Mirth, in youthful Pleasure shares,  
But sighs when Songs and Instruments he hears.
His Spirits are so low, his Voice is drownd, 
He hears as from afar, or in a Swound,  
Like the deaf Murmurs of a distant Sound: 
Uncombd his locks, and squalid his Attire, 
Unlike the Trim of Love and gay Desire;
But full of museful Mopings, which presage  
The loss of Reason, and conclude in Rage. 
This when he had endurd a Year and more, 
Now wholly changd from what he was before, 
It happend once, that, slumbring as he lay,
He dreamt (his Dream began at Break of Day) 
That Hermes oer his Head in Air appeard,  
And with soft Words his drooping Spirits cheerd: 
His Hat adornd with Wings disclosd the God, 
And in his Hand he bore the Sleep-compelling Rod;
Such as he seemd, when at his Sires Command,  
On Argus Head he laid the Snaky Wand; 
Arise, he said, to conquring Athens go,  
There Fate appoints an End of all thy Woe.  
The fright awakend Arcite with a Start,
Against his Bosom bouncd his heaving Heart;  
But soon he said, with scarce-recoverd Breath, 
And thither will I go to meet my Death, 
Sure to be slain; but Death is my Desire, 
Since in Emilias Sight I shall expire.
By chance he spyd a Mirrour while he spoke,  
And gazing there beheld his alterd Look; 
Wondring, he saw his Features and his Hue 
So much were changd, that scarce himself he knew.  
A sudden Thought then starting in his Mind,
Since I in Arcite cannot Arcite find, 
The World may search in vain with all their Eyes, 
But never penetrate through this Disguise.  
Thanks to the Change which Grief and Sickness give, 
In low Estate I may securely live,
And see unknown my Mistress Day by Day. 
He said, and clothd himself in course Array; 
A labring Hind in shew: Then forth he went,  
And to the Athenian Towrs his Journey bent:  
One Squire attended in the same Disguise,
Made conscious of his Masters Enterprize.  
Arrivd at Athens, soon he came to Court, 
Unknown, unquestiond in that thick Resort; 
Proffring for Hire his Service at the Gate,  
To drudge, draw Water, and to run or wait.
So fair befel him, that for little Gain 
He servd at first Emilias Chamberlain;  
And, watchful all Advantages to spy,  
Was still at Hand, and in his Masters Eye; 
And as his Bones were big, and Sinews strong,
Refusd no Toil that could to Slaves belong;  
But from deep Wells with Engines Water drew,  
And usd his Noble Hands the Wood to hew. 
He passd a Year at least attending thus  
On Emily, and calld Philostratus.
But never was there Man of his Degree 
So much esteemd, so well belovd as he.  
So gentle of Condition was he known,  
That through the Court his Courtesie was blown: 
All think him worthy of a greater Place,
And recommend him to the Royal Grace; 
That exercisd within a higher Sphere,  
His Vertues more conspicuous might appear.  
Thus by the general Voice was Arcite praisd, 
And by Great Theseus to high Favour raisd;
Among his Menial Servants first enrolld, 
And largely entertaind with Sums of Gold:  
Besides what secretly from Thebes was sent, 
Of his own Income, and his Annual Rent. 
This well employd, he purchasd Friends and Fame,
But cautiously conceald from whence it came. 
Thus for three Years he livd with large Increase,  
In Arms of Honour, and Esteem in Peace; 
To Theseus Person he was ever near, 
And Theseus for his Vertues held him dear.

WHILE Arcite lives in Bliss, the Story turns  
Where hopeless Palamon in Prison mourns.  
For six long Years immurd, the captive Knight  
Had draggd his Chains, and scarcely seen the Light:  
Lost Liberty, and Love at once he bore;
His Prison paind him much, his Passion more: 
Nor dares he hope his Fetters to remove,  
Nor ever wishes to be free from Love. 
But when the sixth revolving Year was run,  
And May within the Twins received the Sun,
Were it by Chance, or forceful Destiny, 
Which forms in Causes first whateer shall be,  
Assisted by a Friend one Moonless Night,  
This Palamon from Prison took his flight: 
A pleasant Beverage he prepard before
Of Wine and Honey mixd, with added Store 
Of Opium; to his Keeper this he brought,  
Who swallowd unaware the sleepy Draught, 
And snord secure till Morn, his Senses bound 
In Slumber, and in long Oblivion drownd.
Short was the Night, and careful Palamon  
Sought the next Covert eer the rising Sun. 
A thick spread Forest near the City lay,  
To this with lengthened Strides he took his Way,  
(For far he coud not fly, and feard the Day:)
Safe from Pursuit, he meant to shun the Light,  
Till the brown Shadows of the friendly Night  
To Thebes might favour his intended Flight. 
When to his Country come, his next Design 
Was all the Theban Race in Arms to join,
And war on Theseus, till he lost his Life,  
Or won the Beauteous Emily to Wife. 
Thus while his thoughts the lingring Day beguile, 
To gentle Arcite let us turn our Style; 
Who little dreamt how nigh he was to Care,
Till treacherous Fortune caught him in the Snare. 
The Morning-Lark, the Messenger of Day, 
Saluted in her Song the Morning gray; 
And soon the Sun arose with Beams so bright,  
That all th Horizon laughd to see the joyous Sight;
He with his tepid Rays the Rose renews, 
And licks the dropping Leaves, and dries the Dews;  
When Arcite left his Bed, resolvd to pay 
Observance to the Month of merry May, 
Forth on his fiery Steed betimes he rode,
That scarcely prints the Turf on which he trod: 
At ease he seemd, and pransing oer the Plains,  
Turnd only to the Grove his Horses Reins, 
The Grove I namd before; and lighting there, 
A Woodbind Garland sought to crown his Hair;
Then turned his Face against the rising Day,  
And raisd his Voice to welcom in the May.  
For thee, sweet Month, the Groves green Livries wear:  
If not the first, the fairest of the Year:  
For thee the Graces lead the dancing Hours,
And Natures ready Pencil paints the Flowrs: 
When thy short Reign is past, the Fevrish Sun  
The sultry Tropick fears, and moves more slowly on. 
So may thy tender Blossoms fear no Blite, 
Nor Goats with venomd Teeth thy Tendrils bite,
As thou shalt guide my wandring Feet to find  
The fragrant Greens I seek, my Brows to bind. 
His Vows addressd, within the Grove he strayd,  
Till Fate, or Fortune, near the Place conveyd  
His Steps where secret Palamon was laid.
Full little thought of him the gentle Knight, 
Who flying Death had there conceald his Flight,  
In Brakes and Brambles hid, and shunning Mortal Sight;  
And less he knew him for his hated Foe, 
But feard him as a Man he did not know.
But as it has been said of ancient Years, 
That Fields are full of Eyes, and Woods have Ears;  
For this the Wise are ever on their Guard,  
For, Unforeseen, they say, is unprepard. 
Uncautious Arcite thought himself alone,
And less than all suspected Palamon,  
Who, listning, heard him, while he searchd the Grove,  
And loudly sung his Roundelay of Love:  
But on the sudden stoppd, and silent stood,  
(As Lovers often muse, and change their Mood;)
Now high as Heavn, and then as low as Hell,  
Now up, now down, as Buckets in a Well: 
For Venus, like her Day, will change her Cheer, 
And seldom shall we see a Friday clear. 
Thus Arcite having sung, with alterd Hue
Sunk on the Ground, and from his Bosom drew 
A desprate Sigh, accusing Heavn and Fate, 
And angry Junos unrelenting Hate.  
Cursd be the Day when first I did appear;  
Let it be blotted from the Calendar,
Lest it pollute the Month, and poison all the Year. 
Still will the jealous Queen pursue our Race? 
Cadmus is dead, the Theban City was:  
Yet ceases not her Hate: For all who come 
From Cadmus are involvd in Cadmus Doom.
I suffer for my Blood: Unjust Decree! 
That punishes anothers Crime on me.  
In mean Estate I serve my mortal Foe, 
The Man who causd my Countrys Overthrow  
This is not all; for Juno, to my Shame,
Has forcd me to forsake my former Name;  
Arcite I was, Philostratus I am.  
That side of Heavn is all my Enemy:  
Mars ruind Thebes; his Mother ruind me. 
Of all the Royal Race remains but one
Beside my self, th unhappy Palamon,  
Whom Theseus holds in Bonds, and will not free; 
Without a Crime, except his Kin to me.  
Yet these, and all the rest I coud endure; 
But Loves a Malady without a Cure:
Fierce Love has piercd me with his fiery Dart, 
He fries within, and hisses at my Heart.  
Your Eyes, fair Emily, my Fate pursue;  
I suffer for the rest, I die for you. 
Of such a Goddess no Time leaves Record,
Who burnd the Temple where she was adord: 
And let it burn, I never will complain, 
Pleasd with my Suffrings, if you knew my Pain.  
At this a sickly Qualm his Heart assaild,  
His Ears ring inward, and his Senses faild.
No Word missd Palamon of all he spoke, 
But soon to deadly Pale he changed his Look:  
He trembld evry Limb, and felt a Smart, 
As if cold Steel had glided through his Heart;  
Nor longer staid, but starting from his Place,
Discoverd stood, and shewd his hostile Face:  
False Traytor, Arcite, Traytor to thy Blood,  
Bound by thy sacred Oath to seek my Good, 
Now art thou found forsworn for Emily;  
And darst attempt her Love, for whom I die.
So hast thou cheated Theseus with a Wile, 
Against thy Vow, returning to beguile 
Under a borrowd Name: As false to me,  
So false thou art to him who set thee free  
But rest assurd, that either thou shalt die,
Or else renounce thy Claim in Emily:  
For though unarmd I am, and (freed by Chance)  
Am here without my Sword, or pointed Lance, 
Hope not, base Man, unquestiond hence to go, 
For I am Palamon, thy mortal Foe.
Arcite, who heard his Tale and knew the Man,  
His sword unsheathd, and fiercely thus began:  
Now, by the Gods who govern Heavn above, 
Wert thou not weak with Hunger, mad with Love,  
That Word had been thy last, or in this Grove
This Hand should force thee to renounce thy Love. 
The Surety which I gave thee I defie; 
Fool, not to know that Love endures no Tie, 
And Jove but laughs at Lovers Perjury.  
Know, I will serve the fair in thy despight;
But since thou art my Kinsman, and a Knight,  
Here, have my Faith, to-morrow in this Grove  
Our Arms shall plead the Titles of our Love:  
And Heaven so help my Right, as I alone 
Will come, and keep the Cause and Quarrel both unknown;
With Arms of Proof both for myself and thee;  
Chuse thou the best, and leave the worst to me. 
And, that at better Ease thou maist abide,  
Bedding and Clothes I will this Night provide,  
And needful Sustenance, that thou maist be
A Conquest better won, and worthy me. 
His Promise Palamon accepts; but prayd,  
To keep it better than the first he made. 
Thus fair they parted till the Morrows Dawn;  
For each had laid his plighted Faith to Pawn.
Oh Love! Thou sternly dost thy Powr maintain,  
And wilt not bear a Rival in thy Reign, 
Tyrants and thou all Fellowship disdain.  
This was in Arcite provd and Palamon:  
Both in Despair, yet each would love alone.
Arcite returnd, and, as in Honour tyd,  
His Foe with Bedding, and with Food supplyd; 
Then, eer the Day, two Suits of Armour sought, 
Which born before him on his Steed he brought:  
Both were of shining Steel, and wrought so pure
As might the Strokes of two such Arms endure. 
Now, at the Time, and in th appointed Place. 
The Challenger, and Challengd, Face to Face, 
Approach; each other from afar they knew, 
And from afar their Hatred changd their Hue.
So stands the Thracian Heardsman with his Spear,  
Full in the Gap, and hopes the hunted Bear, 
And hears him rustling in the Wood, and sees  
His Course at Distance by the bending Trees:  
And thinks, Here comes my mortal Enemy,
And either he must fall in Fight, or I: 
This while he thinks, he lifts aloft his Dart;  
A genrous Chillness seizes evry Part; 
The Veins-pour back the Blood, and fortifie the Heart.  
Thus pale they meet; their Eyes with Fury burn;
None greets; for none the Greeting will return; 
But in dumb Surliness, each armd with Care 
His Foe profest, as Brother of the War; 
Then both, no Moment lost, at once advance  
Against each other, armd with Sword and Lance:
They lash, they foin, they pass, they strive to bore  
Their Corslets, and the thinnest Parts explore. 
Thus two long Hours in equal Arms they stood, 
And wounded, wound; till both were bathd in Blood; 
And not a Foot of Ground had either got,
As if the World depended on the Spot. 
Fell Arcite like an angry Tyger fard,  
And like a Lion Palamon appeard: 
Or as two Boars whom Love to Battel draws 
With rising Bristles and with froathy Jaws
Their adverse Breasts with Tusks oblique they wound;  
With Grunts and Groans the Forest rings around. 
So fought the Knights, and fighting mus abide,  
Till Fate an Umpire sends their Diffrence to decide. 
The Powr that ministers to Gods Decrees,
And executes on Earth what Heavn foresees  
Called Providence, or Chance, or Fatal Sway 
Comes with resistless Force, and finds o makes her Way. 
Nor Kings, nor Nations, nor united Powr  
One Moment can retard th appointed Hour
And some one Day, some wondrous Chance appears, 
Which happend not in Centuries of Years: 
For sure, whateer we Mortals hate or love, 
Or hope, or fear, depends on Powrs above:  
They move our Appetites to Good or Ill,
And by Foresight necessitate the Will.  
In Theseus this appears; whose youthful Joy 
Was Beasts of Chase in Forests to destroy;  
This gentle Knight, inspird by jolly May,  
Forsook his easie Couch at early Day,
And to the Wood and Wilds pursud his Way.  
Beside him rode Hippolita the Queen,  
And Emily attird in lively Green,  
With Horns, and Hounds, and all the tuneful Cry,  
To hunt a Royal Hart within the Covert nigh:
And, as he followd Mars before, so now 
He serves the Goddess of the Silver Bow.  
The way that Theseus took was to the Wood,  
Where the two Knights in cruel Battel stood:  
The Laund on which they fought, th appointed Place
In which th uncoupld Hounds began the Chace.  
Thither forth-right he rode to rowse the Prey,  
That shaded by the Fern in Harbour lay; 
And thence dislodgd, was wont to leave the Wood  
For open Fields, and cross the Crystal Flood.
Approachd, and looking underneath the Sun, 
He saw proud Arcite, and fierce Palamon,  
In mortal Battel doubling Blow on Blow. 
Like Lightning flamd their Fauchions to and fro, 
And shot a dreadful Gleam; so strong they strook,
There seemd less Force requird to fell an Oak:  
He gazd with Wonder on their equal Might,  
Lookd eager on, but knew not either Knight: 
Resolvd to learn, he spurrd his fiery Steed 
With goring Rowels, to provoke his Speed.
The Minute ended that began the Race, 
So soon he was betwixt em on the Place;  
And with his Sword unsheathd, on Pain of Life  
Commands both Combatants to cease their Strife: 
Then with imperious Tone pursues his Threat;
What are you? Why in Arms together met? 
How dares your Pride presume against my Laws, 
As in a listed Field to fight your Cause? 
Unaskd the Royal Grant; no Marshal by, 
As Knightly Rites require; nor Judge to try?
Then Palamon, with scarce recoverd Breath, 
Thus hasty spoke; We both deserve the Death,  
And both woud die; for look the World around,  
A Pair so wretched is not to be found.  
Our Lifes a Load; encumberd with the Charge,
We long to set th imprisond Soul at large.  
Now, as thou art a Sovereign Judge, decree  
The rightful Doom of Death to him and me, 
Let neither find thy Grace, for Grace is Cruelty. 
Me first, O kill me first, and cure my Woe;
Then sheath the Sword of Justice on my Foe: 
Or kill him first, for when his Name is heard,  
He foremost will receive his due Reward.  
Arcite of Thebes is he; thy mortal Foe, 
On whom thy Grace did Liberty bestow,
But first contracted, that, if ever found 
By Day or Night upon th Athenian Ground, 
His Head should pay the Forfeit: See returnd 
The perjurd Knight, his Oath and Honour scornd. 
For this is he, who, with a borrowd Name
And proferd Service, to thy Palace came, 
Now calld Philostratus: retaind by thee,  
A Traytor trusted, and in high Degree,  
Aspiring to the Bed of beauteous Emily. 
My Part remains, from Thebes my Birth I own,
And call myself th unhappy Palamon.  
Think me not like that Man; since no Disgrace 
Can force me to renounce the Honour of my Race. 
Know me for what I am: I broke thy Chain, 
Nor promisd I thy Prisner to remain:
The Love of Liberty with Life is givn, 
And Life it self th inferiour Gift of Heaven.  
Thus without Crime I fled; but farther know,  
I with this Arcite am thy mortal Foe: 
Then give me Death, since I thy Life pursue;
For Safeguard of thy self, Death is my Due. 
More wouldst thou know? I love bright Emily. 
And for her sake and in her Sight will die: 
But kill my Rival too; for he no less 
Deserves; and I thy righteous Doom will bless,
Assurd that what I lose, he never shall possess. 
To this replyd the stern Athenian Prince,  
And sowrly smild, In owning your Offence 
You judge your self, and I but keep record  
In place of Law, while you pronounce the Word.
Take your Desert, the Death you have decreed; 
I seal your Doom, and ratifie the Deed. 
By Mars, the Patron of my Arms, you die.  
He said; dumb Sorrow seizd the Standers by.  
The Queen, above the rest, by Nature Good,
(The Pattern formd of perfect Womanhood) 
For tender Pity wept: When she began, 
Through the bright Quire th infectious Vertue ran. 
All dropt their Tears, evn the contended Maid; 
And thus among themselves they softly said:
What Eyes can suffer this unworthy Sight! 
Two Youths of Royal Blood, renownd in Fight, 
The Mastership of Heavn in Face and Mind,  
And Lovers, far beyond their faithless Kind:  
See their wide streaming Wounds; they neither came
From Pride of Empire, nor desire of Fame: 
Kings fight for Kingdoms, Madmen for Applause;  
But Love for Love alone; that crowns the Lovers Cause. 
This Thought, which ever bribes the beauteous Kind, 
Such Pity wrought in evry Ladies Mind,
They left their Steeds, and prostrate on the Place, 
From the fierce King, implord th Offenders Grace. 
He pausd a while, stood silent in his Mood,  
(For yet his Rage was boiling in his Blood) 
But soon his tender Mind th Impression felt.
(As softest Metals are not slow to melt 
And Pity soonest runs in gentle Minds:) 
Then reasons with himself; and first he finds 
His Passion cast a Mist before his Sense, 
And either made, or magnifid th Offence.
Offence! of what? to whom? Who judgd the Cause?  
The Prisner freed himself by Natures Laws; 
Born free, he sought his Right: The Man he freed  
Was perjurd, but his Love excusd the Deed:  
Thus pondring, he lookd under with his Eyes,
And saw the Womens Tears, and heard their Cries;  
Which movd Compassion more: He shook his Head, 
And softly sighing to himself, he said, 
Curse on th unpardning Prince, whom Tears can draw  
To no Remorse; who rules by Lions Law;
And deaf to Prayrs, by no Submission bowd,  
Rends all alike; the Penitent, and Proud: 
At this with look serene he raisd his Head;  
Reason resumd her Place, and Passion fled: 
Then thus aloud he spoke: The Powr of Love,
In Earth, and Seas, and Air, and Heavn above,  
Rules, unresisted, with an awful Nod; 
By daily Miracles declard a God: 
He blinds the Wise, gives Eye-sight to the Blind; 
And moulds and stamps anew the Lovers Mind.
Behold that Arcite, and this Palamon, 
Freed from my Fetters, and in Safety gone,  
What hinderd either in their Native Soil 
At ease to reap the Harvest of their Toil?  
But Love, their Lord, did otherwise ordain,
And brought em, in their own Despite again,  
To suffer Death deservd; for well they know  
Tis in my Powr, and I their deadly Foe. 
The Proverb holds, That to be wise and love,  
Is hardly granted to the Gods above.
See how the Madmen bleed: Behold the Gains  
With which their Master, Love, rewards their Pains: 
For sevn long Years, on Duty evry Day,  
Lo their Obedience, and their Monarchs Pay:  
Yet, as in Duty bound, they serve him on,
And ask the Fools, they think it wisely done: 
Nor Ease nor Wealth nor Life it self regard,  
For tis their Maxim, Love is Loves Reward.  
This is not all; the Fair, for whom they strove 
Nor knew before, nor could suspect their Love,
Nor thought, when she beheld the Fight from far,  
Her Beauty was th Occasion of the War. 
But sure a genral Doom on Man is past, 
And all are Fools and Lovers, first or last:  
This both by others and my self I know,
For I have servd their Sovereign, long ago;  
Oft have been caught within the winding Train 
Of Female Snares, and felt the Lovers Pain,  
And learnd how far the God can Humane Hearts constrain.  
To this Remembrance, and the Prayrs of those
Who for th offending Warriors interpose, 
I give their forfeit Lives; on this accord, 
To do me Homage as their Sovreign Lord;  
And as my Vassals, to their utmost Might, 
Assist my Person, and assert my Right.
This freely sworn, the Knights their Grace obtaind;  
Then thus the King his secret Thoughts explaind: 
If Wealth, or Honour, or a Royal Race,  
Or each, or all, may win a Ladies Grace,  
Then either of you Knights may well deserve
A Princess born; and such is she you serve: 
For Emily is Sister to the Crown, 
And but too well to both her Beauty known:  
But shoud you combat till you both were dead,  
Two Lovers cannot share a single Bed:
As, therefore, both are equal in Degree,  
The Lot of both be left to Destiny. 
Now hear th Award, and happy may it prove  
To her, and him who best deserves her Love. 
Depart from hence in peace, and free as Air,
Search the wide World, and where you please repair; 
But on the Day when this returning Sun  
To the same Point through evry sign has run, 
Then each of you his Hundred Knights shall bring  
In Royal Lists, to fight before the King;
And then, the Knight, whom Fate or happy Chance 
Shall with his Friends to Victory advance,  
And grace his Arms so far in equal Fight, 
From out the Bars to force his Opposite,  
Or kill, or make him Recreant on the Plain,
The Prize of Valour and of Love shall gain; 
The vanquishd Party shall their Claim release, 
And the long Jars conclude in lasting Peace.  
The Charge be mine t adorn the chosen Ground,  
The Theatre of War, for Champions so renownd;
And take the Patrons Place of either Knight,  
With Eyes impartial to behold the Fight;  
And Heavn of me so judge, as I shall judge aright. 
If both are satisfid with this Accord, 
Swear by the Laws of Knighthood on my Sword.
Who now but Palamon exults with joy?  
And ravishd Arcite seems to touch the Sky: 
The whole assembld Troop was pleasd as well,  
Extold the Award, and on their Knees they fell 
To bless the gracious King. The Knights with Leave
Departing from the Place, his last Commands receive;  
On Emily with equal Ardour look,  
And from her Eyes their Inspiration took: 
From thence to Thebes old Walls pursue their Way, 
Each to provide his Champions for the Day.
It might be deemd, on our Historians Part,  
Or too much Negligence, or Want of Art, 
If he forgot the vast Magnificence  
Of Royal Theseus, and his large Expence.  
He first enclosd for Lists a level Ground,
The whole Circumference a Mile around:  
The Form was Circular; and all without  
A Trench was sunk, to Moat the Place about. 
Within, an Amphitheatre appeard, 
Raisd in Degrees; to sixty Paces reard:
That when a Man was placd in one Degree, 
Height was allowd for him above to see.  
Eastward was built a Gate of Marble white;  
The like adornd the Western opposite.  
A nobler Object than this Fabrick was,
Rome never saw; nor of so vast a Space. 
For, rich with Spoils of many a conquerd Land, 
All Arts and Artists Theseus could command; 
Who sold for Hire, or wrought for better Fame:  
The Master-Painters, and the Carvers came.
So rose within the Compass of the Year  
An Ages Work, a glorious Theatre. 
Then, oer its Eastern Gate was raisd above  
A Temple, sacred to the Queen of Love;  
An Altar stood below: On either Hand
A Priest with Roses crownd, who held a Myrtle Wand.  
The Dome of Mars was on the Gate opposd, 
And on the North a Turret was enclosd, 
Within the Wall, of Alabaster white,  
And crimson Coral, for the Queen of Night,
Who takes in Sylvan Sports her chaste Delight.  
Within these Oratories might you see  
Rich Carvings, Pourtraitures, and Imagery:  
Where evry Figure to the Life expressd  
The Godheads Powr to whom it was addressd.
In Venus Temple on the Sides were seen  
The broken Slumbers of inamourd Men; 
Prayrs that evn spoke and Pity seemed to call,  
And issuing Sighs that smoakd along the Wall;  
Complaints and hot Desires, the Lovers Hell,
And scalding Tears, that wore a Channel where they fell;  
And all around were Nuptial Bonds, the Ties 
Of Loves Assurance, and a Train of Lies,  
That, made in Lust, conclude in Perjuries.  
Beauty, and Youth, and Wealth, and Luxury,
And spritely Hope, and short-enduring Joy;  
And Sorceries, to raise th Infernal Powrs,  
And Sigils framd in Planetary Hours; 
Expense, and After-thought, and idle Care,  
And Doubts of motley Hue, and dark Despair;
Suspicions, and Fantastical Surmise,  
And Jealousie suffusd, with Jaundice in her Eyes;  
Discolouring all she viewd, in Tawney dressd; 
Down-lookd, and with a Cuckow on her Fist. 
Opposd to her, on t other side advance
The costly Feast, the Carol, and the Dance, 
Minstrels, and Musick, Poetry, and Play,  
And Balls by night, and Turnaments by Day.  
All these were painted on the Wall, and more; 
With Acts, and Monuments of Times before;
And others added by Prophetick Doom,  
And Lovers yet unborn, and Loves to come: 
For there th Idalian mount, and Citheron,  
The Court of Venus, was in Colours drawn: 
Before the Palace-gate, in careless Dress,
And loose Array, sat Portress Idleness; 
There, by the Fount, Narcissus pind alone; 
There Samson was; with wiser Solomon, 
And all the mighty Names by Love undone:  
Medeas Charms were there; Circean Feasts,
With Bowls that turnd inamoured Youth to Beasts. 
Here might be seen, that Beauty, Wealth, and Wit, 
And Prowess, to the Powr of Love submit; 
The spreading Snare for all Mankind is laid;  
And Lovers all betray, and are betrayd.
The Goddess self, some noble Hand had wrought;  
Smiling she seemd, and full of pleasing Thought: 
From Ocean as she first began to rise,  
And smoothd the ruffld Seas, and cleard the Skies; 
She trode the Brine, all bare below the Breast,
And the green Waves but ill conceald the Rest; 
A Lute she held; and on her Head was seen 
A Wreath of Roses red and Myrtles green;  
Her Turtles fannd the buxom Air above; 
And, by his Mother, stood an Infant-Love:
With Wings unfledgd; his Eyes were banded oer;  
His Hands a Bow, his Back a Quiver bore,  
Supplyd with Arrows bright and keen, a deadly Store. 
But in the Dome of mighty Mars the Red  
With diffrent Figures all the Sides were spread:
This Temple, less in Form, with equal Grace 
Was imitative of the first in Thrace: 
For that cold Region was the lovd Abode, 
And Sovereign Mansion of the Warriour-God.  
The Landscape was a Forest wide and bare;
Where neither Beast nor Humane Kind repair; 
The Fowl, that scent afar, the Borders fly, 
And shun the bitter Blast, and wheel about the Sky. 
A Cake of Scurf lies baking on the Ground,  
And prickly Stubs, instead of Trees, are found;
Or Woods with Knots, and Knares deformd and old, 
Headless the most, and hideous to behold: 
A ratling Tempest through the Branches went,  
That strippd em bare, and one sole way they bent. 
Heavn froze above, severe, the Clouds congeal,
And through the Crystal Vault appeard the standing Hail. 
Such was the Face without, a Mountain stood 
Threatning from high, and overlookd the Wood:  
Beneath the lowring Brow, and on a Bent,  
The Temple stood of Mars Armipotent;
The Frame of burnishd Steel, that cast a glare 
From far, and seemd to thaw the freezing Air.  
A streight, long Entry to the Temple led, 
Blind with high Walls; and Horrour over Head: 
Thence issud such a Blast, and hollow Rore,
As threatend from the Hinge, to heave the Door;  
In, through that Door, a Northern Light there shone;  
Twas all it had, for Windows there were none.  
The Gate was Adamant; Eternal Frame!  
Which, hewd by Mars himself, from Indian Quarries came,
The Labour of a God; and all along  
Tough Iron Plates were clenchd to make it strong.  
A Tun about was evry Pillar there; 
A polishd Mirrour shone not half so clear. 
There saw I how the secret Fellon wrought,
And Treason labring in the Traytors Thought;  
And Midwife Time the ripend Plot to Murder brought.  
There, the Red Anger dard the Pallid Fear; 
Next stood Hypocrisie, with holy Lear:  
Soft, smiling, and demurely looking down,
But hid the Dagger underneath the Gown: 
Th assassinating Wife, the Houshold Fiend; 
And far the blackest there, the Traytor-Friend. 
On t other side there stood Destruction bare;  
Unpunishd Rapine, and a Waste of War,
Contest, with sharpend Knives in Cloysters drawn,  
And all with Blood bespread the holy Lawn.  
Loud Menaces were heard, and foul Disgrace, 
And bawling Infamy, in Language base; 
Till Sense was lost in Sound, and Silence fled the Place.
The Slayer of Himself yet saw I there,  
The Gore congeald was clotterd in his Hair: 
With Eyes half closd, and gaping Mouth he lay, 
And grim, as when he breathd his sullen Soul away. 
In midst of all the Dome, Misfortune sat,
And gloomy Discontent, and fell Debate, 
And Madness laughing in his ireful Mood;  
And armd Complaint on Theft; and Cries of Blood. 
There was the murderd Corps, in Covert laid, 
And Violent Death in thousand Shapes displayd:
The City to the Soldiers Rage resignd:  
Successless Wars, and Poverty behind: 
Ships burnt in Fight, or forcd on Rocky Shores,  
And the rash Hunter strangled by the Boars: 
The new-born Babe by Nurses overlaid;
And the Cook caught within the raging Fire he made. 
All ills of Mars his Nature, Flame and Steel: 
The gasping Charioteer, beneath the Wheel 
Of his own Car; the ruind House that falls 
And intercepts her Lord betwixt the Walls:
The whole Division that to Mars pertains, 
All Trades of Death that deal in Steel for Gains, 
Were there: The Butcher, Armourer, and Smith, 
Who forges sharpend Fauchions, or the Scythe.  
The scarlet Conquest on a Towr was placd,
With Shouts, and Soldiers Acclamations gracd:  
A pointed Sword hung threatning oer his Head,  
Sustaind but by a slender Twine of Thred.  
There saw I Mars his Ides, the Capitol, 
The Seer in vain foretelling Csars Fall;
The last Triumvirs, and the Wars they move, 
And Antony, who lost the World for Love.  
These, and a thousand more, the Fane adorn; 
Their Fates were painted eer the Men were born,  
All copied from the Heavns, and ruling Force
Of the Red Star, in his revolving Course. 
The Form of Mars high on a Chariot stood, 
All sheathd in Arms, and gruffly lookd the God: 
Two Geomantick Figures were displayd 
Above his Head, a Warriour and a Maid,
One when Direct, and one when Retrograde. 
Tird with Deformities of Death, I haste  
To the third Temple of Diana chaste;  
A Sylvan Scene with various Greens was drawn, 
Shades on the Sides, and on the midst a Lawn:
The Silver Cynthia, with her Nymphs around, 
Pursud the flying Deer, the Woods with Horns resound:  
Calistho there stood manifest of Shame, 
And, turnd a Bear, the Northern Star became: 
Her Son was next, and, by peculiar Grace
In the cold Circle held the second Place: 
The Stag Acteon in the Stream had spyd 
The naked Huntress, and, for seeing, dyd;  
His Hounds, unknowing of his Change, pursue 
The Chace, and their mistaken Master slew.
Peneian Daphne too was there to see,  
Apollos Love before, and now his Tree: 
Th adjoining Fane th assembld Greeks expressd,  
And hunting of the Caledonian beast.  
Oenides Valour, and his envyd Prize;
The fatal Powr of Atalantas Eyes; 
Dianas Vengeance on the Victor shown,  
The Murdress Mother, and consuming Son; 
The Volscian Queen extended on the Plain; 
The Treason punishd, and the Traytor slain.
The rest were various Huntings, well designd,  
And Salvage Beasts destroyd, of evry Kind:  
The graceful Goddess was arrayd in Green;  
About her Feet were little Beagles seen,  
That watchd with up ward Eyes the Motions of their Queen.
Her Legs were Buskind, and the Left before,  
In act to shoot, a Silver Bow she bore, 
And at her Back a painted Quiver wore.  
She trod a wexing Moon, that soon woud wane, 
And drinking borrowed Light, be filld again;
With down-cast Eyes, as seeming to survey 
The dark Dominions, her alternate Sway. 
Before her stood a Woman in her Throws, 
And calld Lucinas Aid, her Burden to disclose.  
All these the Painter drew with such Command,
That Nature snatchd the Pencil from his Hand,  
Ashamd and angry that his Art could feign  
And mend the Tortures of a Mothers Pain.  
Theseus beheld the Fanes of evry God,  
And thought his mighty Cost was well bestowd:
So Princes now their Poets should regard; 
But few can write, and fewer can reward.  
The Theater thus raisd, the Lists enclosd,  
And all with vast Magnificence disposd,  
We leave the Monarch pleased, and haste to bring
The Knights to combate; and their Arms to sing.

THE DAY approachd when Fortune shoud decide 
Th important Enterprize, and give the Bride; 
For now, the Rivals round the World had sought, 
And each his Number, well appointed, brought. 
The Nations far and near contend in Choice,
And send the Flowr of War by Publick Voice;  
That after, or before, were never known 
Such Chiefs; as each an Army seemd alone:  
Beside the Champions; all of high Degree, 
Who Knighthood lovd, and Deeds of Chivalry,
Throngd to the Lists, and envyd to behold,  
The Names of others, not their own, inrolld. 
Nor seems it strange; for evry Noble Knight  
Who loves the Fair, and is endud with Might, 
In such a Quarrel woud be proud to fight.
There breaths not scarce a Man on British Ground  
(An Isle for Love and Arms of old renownd) 
But would have sold his Life to purchase Fame,  
To Palamon or Arcite sent his Name; 
And had the Land selected of the best,
Half had come hence, and let the World provide the rest.  
A hundred Knights with Palamon there came,  
Approvd in Fight, and Men of Mighty Name;  
Their Arms were sevral, as their Nations were, 
But furnishd all alike with Sword and Spear.
Some wore Coat-armour, imitating Scale; 
And next their Skins were stubborn Shirts of Mail.  
Some wore a Breastplate and a light Juppon, 
Their Horses clothd with rich Caparison; 
Some for Defence would Leathern Bucklers use,
Of folded Hides; and others Shields of Pruce. 
One hung a Poleax at his Saddle-bow,  
And one a heavy Mace, to stun the Foe:  
One for his Legs and Knees provided well, 
With Jambeux armd, and double Plates of Steel:
This on his Helmet wore a Ladies Glove, 
And that a Sleeve embroiderd by his Love.  
With Palamon, above the rest in Place,  
Lycurgus came, the surly King of Thrace;  
Black was his Beard, and manly was his Face:
The Balls of his broad Eyes rolld in his head, 
And glard betwixt a Yellow and a Red;  
He lookd a Lion with a gloomy Stare, 
And oer his Eye-brows hung his matted Hair;  
Big-bond and large of Limbs, with Sinews strong,
Broad-shoulderd, and his Arms were round and long. 
Four Milk-white Bulls (the Thracian Use of old) 
Were yokd to draw his Car of burnishd Gold. 
Upright he stood, and bore aloft his Shield,  
Conspicuous from afar, and over-lookd the Field
His Surcoat was a Bear-skin on his Back;  
His Hair hung long behind, and glossy Raven-black.  
His ample Forehead bore a Coronet 
With sparkling Diamonds, and with Rubies set: 
Ten Brace, and more, of Greyhounds, snowy fair,
And tall as Stags, ran loose, and coursd around his Chair, 
A Match for Pards in Flight, in grappling for the Bear; 
With Golden Muzzles all their Mouths were bound,  
And Collars of the same their Necks surround. 
Thus thro the Fields Lycurgus took his way;
His hundred Knights attend in Pomp and proud Array. 
To match this Monarch, with strong Arcite came  
Emelrius, king of Inde, a mighty Name,  
On a Bay Courser, goodly to behold, 
The Trappings of his Horse embossd with barbrous Gold.
Not Mars bestrode a Steed with greater Grace; 
His Surcoat oer his Arms was Cloth of Thrace,  
Adornd with Pearls, all Orient, round, and great;  
His Saddle was of Gold, with Emeralds set.  
His Shoulders large a Mantle did attire,
With Rubies thick, and sparkling as the Fire; 
His Amber-colourd Locks in Ringlets run, 
With graceful Negligence, and shone against the Sun.  
His Nose was aquiline, his eyes were blue,  
Ruddy his Lips, and fresh and fair his Hue:
Some sprinkled Freckles on his Face were seen,  
Whose dusk set off the Whiteness of the Skin: 
His awful Presence did the Crowd surprize,  
Nor durst the rash Spectator meet his Eyes, 
Eyes that confessd him born for Kingly Sway,
So fierce, they flashd intolerable Day.  
His Age in Natures youthful Prime appeared,  
And just began to bloom his yellow Beard. 
Wheneer he spoke, his Voice was heard around,  
Loud as a Trumpet, with a Silver Sound.
A Laurel wreathd his Temples, fresh, and green,  
And Myrtle-sprigs, the Marks of Love, were mixd between. 
Upon his Fist he bore, for his Delight, 
An Eagle well reclaimd, and Lilly-white. 
His hundred Knights attend him to the War,
All armd for Battel; save their Heads were bare. 
Words, and Devices blazd on evry Shield,  
And pleasing was the Terrour of the Field.  
For Kings, and Dukes, and Barons you might see, 
Like sparkling Stars, though diffrent in Degree,
All for th Increase of Arms, and Love of Chivalry. 
Before the King, tame Leopards led the Way, 
And Troops of Lions innocently play.  
So Bacchus through the conquerd Indies rode, 
And Beasts in Gambols friskd before their honest God.
In this Array the War of either side  
Through Athens passd with Military Pride.  
At Prime, they entered on the Sunday Morn;  
Rich Tapstry spread the Streets, and Flowers the Posts adorn.  
The Town was all a Jubilee of Feasts;
So Theseus willd, in Honour of his Guests; 
Himself with open Arms the Kings embracd,  
Then all the rest in their Degrees were gracd. 
No Harbinger was needful for the Night, 
For evry House was proud to lodge a Knight.
I pass the Royal Treat, nor must relate 
The Gifts bestowd, nor how the Champions sate; 
Who first, who last, or how the Knights addressd 
Their Vows, or who was fairest at the Feast;  
Whose Voice, whose graceful Dance did most surprise,
Soft amrous Sighs, and silent Love of Eyes.  
The Rivals call my Muse another Way,  
To sing their Vigils for th ensuing Day. 
Twas ebbing Darkness, past the Noon of Night:  
And Prospher on the Confines of the Light,
Promisd the Sun; ere Day began to spring,] 
The tuneful Lark already stretchd her Wing,  
And flickring on her Nest, made short Essays to sing.  
When wakeful Palamon, preventing Day, 
Took, to the Royal Lists, his early way,
To Venus at her Fane, in her own House, to pray.  
There, falling on his Knees before her Shrine,  
He thus implord with Prayrs her Powr divine. 
Creator Venus, genial Powr of Love,  
The Bliss of Men below, and Gods above,
Beneath the sliding Sun thou runnst thy Race,  
Dost fairest shine, and best become thy Place.  
For thee the Winds their Eastern Blasts forbear,  
Thy Month reveals the Spring, and opens all the Year. 
Thee, Goddess, thee the Storms of Winter fly,
Earth smiles with Flowrs renewing; laughs the Sky, 
And Birds to Lays of Love their tuneful Notes apply.  
For thee the Lion loaths the Taste of Blood,  
And roaring hunts his Female through the Wood;  
For thee the Bulls rebellow through the Groves,
And tempt the Stream, and snuff their absent Loves. 
Tis thine, whateer is pleasant, good, or fair;  
All Nature is thy Province, Life thy Care;  
Thou madst the World, and dost the World repair. 
Thou gladder of the mount of Cytheron,
Increase of Jove, Companion of the Sun, 
If eer Adonis touchd thy tender Heart,  
Have pity, Goddess, for thou knowst the Smart: 
Alas! I have not Words to tell my Grief;  
To vent my Sorrow woud be some Relief:
Light Suffrings give us Leisure to complain; 
We groan, but cannot speak, in greater Pain.  
O Goddess, tell thy self what I would say,  
Thou knowst it, and I feel too much to pray. 
So grant my Suit, as I enforce my Might,
In Love to be thy Champion, and thy Knight, 
A Servant to thy Sex, a Slave to thee,  
A foe professd to barren Chastity. 
Nor ask I Fame or Honour of the Field,  
Nor chuse I more to vanquish, than to yield:
In my Divine Emilia make me blest,  
Let Fate, or partial Chance, dispose the rest:  
Find thou the Manner, and the Means prepare;  
Possession, more than Conquest, is my Care. 
Mars is the Warriours God; in him it lies
On whom he favours, to confer the Prize;  
With smiling Aspect you serenely move 
In your fifth Orb, and rule the Realm of Love.  
The Fates but only spin the courser Clue, 
The finest of the Wooll is left for you.
Spare me but one small portion of the Twine,  
And let the Sisters cut below your Line:  
The rest among the Rubbish may they sweep,  
Or add it to the Yarn of some old Misers Heap. 
But if you this ambitious Prayr deny,
(A Wish, I grant, beyond Mortality,)  
Then let me sink beneath proud Arcites Arms, 
And I once dead, let him possess her Charms.  
Thus ended he; then, with Observance due, 
The sacred Incence on her Altar threw:
The curling Smoke mounts heavy from the Fires;  
At length it catches Flame, and in a Blaze expires; 
At once the gracious Goddess gave the Sign, 
Her Statue shook, and trembld all the Shrine:  
Pleasd Palamon the tardy Omen took;
For, since the Flames pursued the trailing Smoke, 
He knew his Boon was granted; but the Day 
To distance drivn, and Joy adjournd with long Delay.  
Now Morn with Rosie Light had streakd the Sky, 
Up rose the Sun, and up rose Emily
Addressd her early Steps to Cynthias Fane,  
In State attended by her Maiden Train,  
Who bore the Vests that Holy Rites require, 
Incence, and odrous Gums, and coverd Fire.  
The plenteous Horns with pleasant Mead they crown,
Nor wanted aught besides in Honour of the Moon. 
Now while the Temple smoakd with hallowd Steam, 
They wash the Virgin in a living Stream;  
The secret Ceremonies I conceal:  
Uncouth; perhaps unlawful to reveal:
But such they were as Pagan Use requird, 
Performed by Women when the Men retird,  
Whose Eyes profane their chast mysterious Rites 
Might turn to Scandal, or obscene Delights. 
Well-meaners think no Harm; but for the rest,
Things sacred they pervert, and Silence is the best.  
Her shining Hair, uncombd, was loosly spread,  
A Crown of Mastless Oak adornd her Head  
When to the Shrine approachd, the spotless Maid  
Had kindling Fires on either Altar laid:
(The Rites were such as were observd of old, 
By Statius in his Theban Story told.) 
Then kneeling with her Hands across her Breast, 
Thus lowly she preferrd her chast Request. 
O Goddess, Haunter of the Woodland Green,
To whom both Heavn and Earth and Seas are seen;  
Queen of the nether Skies, where half the Year  
Thy Silver Beams descend, and light the gloomy Sphere;  
Goddess of Maids, and conscious of our Hearts,  
So keep me from the Vengeance of thy Darts,
Which Niobes devoted Issue felt, 
When hissing through the Skies the featherd Deaths were dealt: 
As I desire to live a Virgin-life,  
Nor know the Name of Mother or of Wife. 
Thy Votress from my tender Years I am,
And love, like thee, the Woods and Sylvan Game. 
Like Death, thou knowst, I loath the Nuptial State,  
And Man, the Tyrant of our Sex, I hate, 
A lowly Servant, but a lofty Mate.  
Where Love is Duty on the Female Side,
On theirs mere sensual Gust, and sought with surly Pride. 
Now by thy triple Shape, as thou art seen 
In Heavn, Earth, Hell, and evry where a Queen,  
Grant this my first Desire; let Discord cease,  
And make betwixt the Rivals lasting Peace:
Quench their hot Fire, or far from me remove  
The Flame, and turn it on some other Love.  
Or if my frowning Stars have so decreed,  
That one must be rejected, one succeed, 
Make him my Lord, within whose faithful Breast
Is fixd my Image, and who loves me best. 
But oh! evn that avert! I chuse it not,  
But take it as the least unhappy Lot. 
A Maid I am, and of thy Virgin-Train; 
Oh, let me still that spotless Name retain!
Frequent the Forests, thy chast Will obey,  
And only make the Beasts of Chace my Prey!  
The Flames ascend on either Altar clear,  
While thus the blameless Maid addressd her Prayr. 
When lo! the burning Fire that shone so bright
Flew off, all sudden, with extinguishd Light,  
And left one Altar dark, a little space;  
Which turnd self-kindld, and renewd the Blaze: 
That other Victour-Flame a Moment stood 
Then fell, and lifeless left th extinguishd Wood;
For ever lost, th irrevocable Light  
Forsook the blackning Coals, and sunk to Night: 
At either End it whistled as it flew, 
And as the Brands were green, so droppd the Dew; 
Infected as it fell with Sweat of Sanguin Hue.
The Maid from that ill Omen turned her Eyes,  
And with loud Shrieks and Clamours rent the Skies,  
Nor knew what signifid the boding Sign,  
But found the Powrs displeasd, and feard the Wrath Divine. 
Then shook the Sacred Shrine, and sudden Light
Sprung through the vaulted Roof, and made the Temple bright.  
The Powr, behold! the Power in Glory shone,  
By her bent Bow and her keen Arrows known;  
The rest, a Huntress issuing from the Wood, 
Reclining on her Cornel Spear she stood.
Then gracious thus began; Dismiss thy Fear, 
And Heavns unchangd Decrees attentive hear: 
More powrful Gods have torn thee from my Side, 
Unwilling to resign, and doomd a Bride:  
The two contending Knights are weighd above;
One Mars protects, and one the Queen of Love: 
But which the Man is in the Thundrers Breast, 
This he pronound, tis he who loves thee best. 
The Fire that once extinct, revivd again 
Foreshews the Love allotted to remain.
Farewell! she said, and vanishd from the Place;  
The Sheaf of Arrows shook, and rattld in the Case. 
Agast at this, the Royal Virgin stood,  
Disclaimd, and now no more a Sister of the Wood: 
But to the parting Goddess thus she prayd:
Propitious still, be present to my Aid, 
Nor quite abandon your once favourd Maid.  
Then sighing she returnd; but smild betwixt,  
With Hopes, and Fears, and Joys with Sorrows mixt.  
The next returning Planetary Hour
Of Mars, who shard the Heptarchy of Powr, 
His Steps bold Arcite to the Temple bent, 
T adore with Pagan Rites the Powr Armipotent: 
Then prostrate, low before his Altar lay, 
And raisd his manly Voice, and thus began to pray.
Strong God of Arms, whose Iron Scepter sways  
The freezing North, and Hyperborean seas, 
And Scythian Colds, and Thracias Wintry Coast, 
Where stand thy Steeds, and thou art honourd most: 
There most, but evry where thy Powr is known,
The Fortune of the Fight is all thy own:  
Terrour is thine, and wild Amazement flung  
From out thy Chariot, withers evn the Strong:  
And Disarray and shameful Rout ensue, 
And Force is added to the fainting Crew.
Acknowledgd as thou art, accept my Prayer, 
If ought I have atchievd deserve thy Care: 
If to my utmost Powr with Sword and Shield 
I dard the Death, unknowing how to yield,  
And falling in my Rank, still kept the Field:
Then let my Arms prevail, by thee sustaind,  
That Emily by Conquest may be gaind. 
Have pity on my Pains; nor those unknown  
To Mars, which, when a Lover, were his own. 
Venus, the Publick Care of all above,
Thy stubborn Heart has softned into Love: 
Now by her Blandishments and powrful Charms, 
When yielded, she lay curling in thy Arms,  
Evn by thy Shame, if Shame it may be calld, 
When Vulcan had thee in his net inthralld;
O envyd Ignominy, sweet Disgrace,  
When evry god that saw thee, wishd thy Place! 
By those dear Pleasures, aid my Arms in Fight,  
And make me conquer in my Patrons Right: 
For I am young, a Novice in the Trade,
The Fool of Love, unpractisd to persuade;  
And want the soothing Arts that catch the Fair, 
But, caught my self, lie strugling in the Snare;  
And she I love, or laughs at all my Pain  
Or knows her Worth too well; and pays me with Disdain.
For sure I am, unless I win in Arms,  
To stand excluded from Emilias Charms: 
Nor can my Strength avail, unless by thee 
Endud with force I gain the Victory: 
Then for the Fire which warmd thy genrous Heart,
Pity thy Subjects Pains and equal Smart  
So be the Morrows Sweat and Labour mine,  
The Palm and Honour of the Conquest thine:  
Then shall the War, and stern Debate, and Strife  
Immortal, be the Busness of my Life;
And in thy Fane, the dusty Spoils among.  
High on the burnishd Roof, my Banner shall be hung;  
Rankd with my Champions Bucklers, and below, 
With Arms reversd, th Atchievements of my Foe:  
And while these Limbs the vital Spirit feeds,
While Day to Night, and Night to Day succeeds,  
Thy smoaking Altar shall be fat with Food 
Of Incence and the grateful Steam of Blood; 
Burnt Offrings Morn and Evning shall be thine,  
And Fires eternal in thy Temple shine.
This Bush of yellow Beard, this Length of Hair, 
Which from my Birth inviolate I bear, 
Guiltless of Steel, and from the Razour free, 
Shall fall a plenteous Crop, reservd for thee. 
So may my Arms with Victory be blest,
I ask no more; let Fate dispose the rest. 
The Champion ceasd; there followd in the Close  
A hollow Groan; a murmring Wind arose, 
The Rings of Irn, that on the Doors were hung, 
Sent out a jarring Sound, and harshly rung
The bolted Gates flew open at the Blast,  
The Storm rushd in; and Arcite stood agast:  
The Flames were blown aside, yet shone they bright, 
Fannd by the Wind, and gave a ruffld Light. 
Then from the Ground a Scent began to rise,
Sweet-smelling as accepted Sacrifice: 
This Omen pleasd, and as the Flames aspire,  
With odrous Incence Arcite heaps the Fire  
Nor wanted Hymns to Mars or Heathen Charms: 
At length the nodding Statue clashd his Arms,
And with a sullen Sound, and feeble Cry,  
Half sunk, and half pronouncd the Word of Victory. 
For this, with Soul devout, he thankd the God, 
And, of Success secure, returnd to his Abode.  
These Vows thus granted, raisd a Strife above,
Betwixt the God of War, and Queen of Love.  
She granting first, had Right of Time to plead; 
But he had granted too, nor would recede. 
Jove was for Venus: but he feard his Wife, 
And seemd unwilling to decide the Strife;
Till Saturn from his Leaden Throne arose, 
And found a Way the Diffrence to compose:  
Though sparing of his Grace, to Mischief bent,  
He seldom does a Good with good Intent. 
Wayward, but wise; by long Experience taught,
To please both Parties, for ill Ends, he sought:  
For this Advantage Age from Youth has won,  
As not to be outridden, though outrun.  
By Fortune he was now to Venus Trind,  
And with stern Mars in Capricorn was joind:
Of him disposing in his own Abode,  
He soothd the Goddess, while he gulld the God:  
Cease, Daughter, to complain; and stint the Strife; 
Thy Palamon shall have his promisd Wife: 
And Mars, the Lord of Conquest, in the Fight
With Palmand Laurel shall adorn his Knight. 
Wide is my Course, nor turn I to my Place 
Till Length of Time, and move with tardy Pace.  
Man feels me, when I press th Etherial Plains; 
My Hand is heavy, and the Wound remains.
Mine is the Shipwreck in a Watry Sign;  
And in an Earthy, the dark Dungeon mine.  
Cold shivering Agues, melancholy Care,  
And bitter blasting Winds, and poisond Air,  
Are mine, and wilful Death, resulting from Despair.
The throtling Quinsey tis my Star appoints,  
And Rheumatisms I send to rack the Joints:  
When Churls rebel against their Native Prince,  
I arm their Hands, and furnish the Pretence;  
And housing in the Lions hateful Sign,
Bought Senates, and deserting Troops are mine.  
Mine is the privy Poisning; I command  
Unkindly Seasons, and ungrateful Land.  
By me Kings Palaces are pushd to Ground, 
And Miners, crushd beneath their Mines are found.
Twas I slew Samson, when the Pillard Hall 
Fell down, and crushd the Many with the Fall.  
My Looking is the Sire of Pestilence, 
That sweeps at once the People and the Prince.  
Now weep no more, but trust thy Grandsires Art;
Mars shall be pleasd, and thou perform thy Part. 
Tis ill, though diffrent your Complexions are,  
The Family of Heavn for Men should war.  
Th Expedient pleasd, where neither lost his Right:  
Mars had the Day, and Venus had the Night.
The Management they left to Chronos Care. 
Now turn we to th Effect, and sing the War.  
In Athens all was Pleasure, Mirth, and Play,  
All proper to the Spring, and spritely May: 
Which every Soul inspird with such Delight,
Twas Justing all the Day, and Love at Night. 
Heavn smild, and gladded was the Heart of Man;  
And Venus had the World, as when it first began.  
At length in Sleep their Bodies they compose, 
And dreamt the future Fight, and early rose.
Now scarce the dawning Day began to spring, 
As at a Signal givn, the Streets with Clamours ring: 
At once the Crowd arose; confusd and high, 
Even from the Heavn was heard a shouting Cry;  
For Mars was early up, and rowzd the Sky.
The Gods came downward to behold the Wars,  
Sharpning their Sights, and leaning from their Stars. 
The Neighing of the genrous Horse was heard, 
For Battel by the busie Groom prepard: 
Rustling of Harness, ratling of the Shield,
Clattring of Armour, furbishd for the Field.  
Crowds to the Castle mounted up the Street; 
Battring the Pavement with their Coursers Feet:  
The greedy Sight might there devour the Gold  
Of glittring Arms, too dazling to behold:
And polishd Steel that cast the View aside,  
And Crested Morions, with their Plumy Pride.  
Knights, with a long Retinue of their Squires,  
In gawdy Livries march, and quaint Attires.  
One lacd the Helm, another held the Lance:
A third the shining Buckler did advance.  
The Courser pawd the Ground with restless Feet,  
And snorting foamd, and champd the Golden Bit.  
The Smiths and Armourers on Palfreys ride.  
Files in their Hands, and Hammers at their Side,
And nails for loosend Spears, and Thongs for Shields provide.  
The Yeomen guard the Streets, in seemly Bands;  
And Clowns come crowding on, with Cudgels in their Hands. 
The Trumpets, next the Gate, in order placd, 
Attend the Sign to sound the Martial Blast:
The Palace-yard is filld with floating Tides,  
And the last Comers bear the former to the Sides. 
The Throng is in the midst: The common Crew 
Shut out, the Hall admits the better Few. 
In Knots they stand, or in a Rank they walk,
Serious in Aspect, earnest in their Talk: 
Factious, and favring this or tother Side,  
As their strong Fancies, and weak Reason guide; 
Their Wagers back their Wishes: Numbers hold  
With the fair freckld King, and Beard of Gold:
So vigrous are his Eyes, such Rays they cast,  
So prominent his Eagles Beak is placd. 
But most their Looks on the black Monarch bend, 
His rising Muscles, and his Brawn commend;  
His double-biting Ax, and beamy Spear,
Each asking a Gygantick Force to rear.  
All spoke as partial Favour movd the mind; 
And safe themselves, at others Cost divind.  
Wakd by the Cries, th Athenian Chief arose. 
The Knightly Forms of Combate to dispose;
And passing through th obsequious Guards, he sate  
Conspicuous on a Throne, sublime in State;  
There, for the two contending Knights he sent:  
Armd Cap-a-pe, with Revrence low they bent; 
He smild on both, and with superiour Look
Alike their offerd Adoration took. 
The People press on evry Side to see 
Their awful Prince, and hear his high Decree. 
Then signing to their Heralds with his Hand,  
They gave his Orders from their lofty Stand.
Silence is thrice enjoind; then thus aloud 
The King at Arms bespeaks the Knights and listning Crowd. 
Our Sovereign Lord has ponderd in his Mind 
The Means to spare the Blood of gentle Kind;  
And of his Grace and in-born Clemency
He modifies his first severe Decree;  
The keener Edge of Battel to rebate,  
The Troops for Honour fighting, not for Hate. 
He wills, not Death shoud terminate their Strife,  
And Wounds, if Wounds ensue, be short of Life;
But issues, eer the Fight, his dread Command,  
That Slings afar, and Ponyards Hand to Hand,  
Be banishd from the Field; that none shall dare  
With shortned Sword to stab in closer War;  
But in fair Combate fight with manly Strength
Nor push with biting Point, but strike at length. 
The Turney is allowd but one Career, 
Of the tough Ash, with the sharp-grinded Spear. 
But Knights unhorsd may rise from off the Plain, 
And fight on Foot, their Honour to regain.
Nor, if at Mischief taken, on the Ground  
Be slain, but Prisners to the Pillar bound,  
At either Barrier placed; nor (Captives made,)  
Be freed, or armd anew the Fight invade: 
The Chief of either side, bereft of Life,
Or yielded to his Foe, concludes the Strife.  
Thus dooms the Lord: Now valiant Knights and young, 
Fight each his fill with Swords and Maces long. 
The Herald ends: The vaulted Firmament  
With loud Acclaims, and vast Applause is rent:
Heavn guard a Prince so gracious and so good,  
So just, and yet so provident of Blood! 
This was the genral Cry. The Trumpets sound, 
And Warlike Symphony is heard around. 
The marching Troops through Athens take their Way,
The great Earl-Marshal orders their Array.  
The Fair from high the passing Pomp behold; 
A Rain of Flowrs is from the Windows rolld. 
The Casements are with Golden Tissue spread,  
And Horses Hoofs, for Earth, on silken Tapstry tread.
The King goes midmost, and the Rivals ride  
In equal Rank, and close his either Side. 
Next after these, there rode the Royal Wife,  
With Emily, the Cause, and the Reward of Strife.  
The following Cavalcade, by Three and Three,
Proceed by Titles marshalld in Degree. 
Thus through the Southern Gate they take their Way, 
And at the Lists arrivd eer Prime of Day. 
There, parting from the King, the Chiefs divide,  
And wheeling East and West, before their Many ride.
Th Athenian Monarch mounts his Throne on high, 
And after him the Queen, and Emily: 
Next these, the Kindred of the Crown are gracd 
With nearer Seats, and Lords by Ladies placd.  
Scarce were they seated, when with Clamours loud
In rushd at once a rude promiscuous Crowd, 
The Guards, and then each other overbare, 
And in a Moment throng the spacious Theatre.  
Now changd the jarring Noise to Whispers low,  
As Winds forsaking Seas more softly blow;
When at the Western Gate, on which the Car  
Is placd aloft, that bears the God of War, 
Proud Arcite entring armd before his Train 
Stops at the Barrier, and divides the Plain.  
Red was his Banner, and displayd abroad
The bloody Colours of his Patron God. 
At that self-moment enters Palamon  
The Gate of Venus, and the Rising Sun;  
Wavd by the wanton Winds, his Banner flies,  
All maiden White, and shares the peoples Eyes.
From East to West, look all the World around, 
Two Troops so matchd were never to be found: 
Such Bodies built for Strength, of equal Age, 
In Stature sizd; so proud an Equipage: 
The nicest Eye coud no Distinction make,
Where lay th Advantage, or what Side to take.  
Thus rangd, the Herald for the last proclaims  
A Silence, while they answerd to their Names:  
For so the King decreed, to shun with Care  
The Fraud of Musters false, the common Bane of War.
The Tale was just, and then the Gates were closd;  
And Chief to Chief, and Troop to Troop opposd. 
The Heralds last retird, and loudly cryd, 
The Fortune of the Field be fairly tryd. 
At this the Challenger, with fierce Defie
His Trumpet sounds; the Challengd makes Reply: 
With Clangour rings the Field, resounds the vaulted Sky.  
Their Vizors closed, their Lances in the Rest,  
Or at the Helmet pointed, or the Crest; 
They vanish from the Barrier, speed the Race,
And spurring see decrease the middle Space. 
A Cloud of Smoke envellops either Host, 
And all at once the Combatants are lost:  
Darkling they join adverse, and shock unseen, 
Coursers with Coursers justling, Men with Men:
As labring in Eclipse, a while they stay,  
Till the next Blast of Wind restores the Day. 
They look anew: The beauteous Form of Fight 
Is changd, and War appears a grizly Sight. 
Two Troops in fair Array one moment showd,
The next, a Field with fallen Bodies strowd: 
Not half the Number in their Seats are found, 
But Men and Steeds lie grovling on the Ground. 
The points of Spears are stuck within the Shield, 
The Steeds without their Riders scour the Field.
The Knights unhorsd, on Foot renew the Fight;  
The glittring Fauchions cast a gleaming Light; 
Hauberks and Helms are hewd with many a Wound; 
Out spins the streaming Blood, and dies the Ground. 
The mighty Maces with such Haste descend,
They break the Bones, and make the solid Armour bend. 
This thrusts amid the Throng with furious Force;  
Down goes, at once, the Horseman and the Horse: 
That Courser stumbles on the fallen Steed,  
And floundring, throws the Rider oer his Head.
One rolls along, a Foot-ball to his Foes; 
One with a broken Truncheon deals his Blows.  
This halting, this disabld with his Wound, 
In Triumph led, is to the Pillar bound, 
Where by the Kings Award he must abide:
There goes a Captive led on tother Side. 
By Fits they cease; and leaning on the Lance, 
Take Breath a while, and to new Fight advance.  
Full oft the Rivals met, and neither spard 
His utmost Force, and each forgot to ward.
The Head of this was to the Saddle bent,  
That other backward to the Crupper sent:  
Both were by Turns unhorsd; the jealous Blows  
Fall thick and heavy, when on Foot they close.  
So deep their Fauchions bite, that evry Stroke
Piercd to the Quick; and equal Wounds they gave and took.  
Born far asunder by the Tides of men, 
Like Adamant and Steel they met agen. 
So when a Tyger sucks the Bullocks Blood,  
A famishd Lion issuing from the Wood
Roars Lordly fierce, and challenges the Food. 
Each claims Possession, neither will obey,  
But both their Paws are fastend on the Prey; 
They bite, they tear; and while in vain they strive,  
The Swains come armd between, and both to Distance drive.
At length, as Fate foredoomd, and all things tend  
By Course of Time to their appointed End; 
So when the Sun to West was far declind, 
And both afresh in mortal Battel joind,  
The strong Emetrius came in Arcites Aid,
And Palamon with Odds was overlaid: 
For turning short, he struck with all his Might 
Full on the Helmet of th unwary Knight.  
Deep was the Wound; he staggerd with the Blow, 
And turnd him to his unexpected Foe;
Whom with such Force he struck, he felld him down, 
And cleft the Circle of his Golden Crown. 
But Arcites Men, who now prevaild in Fight, 
Twice Ten at once surround the single Knight: 
Oerpowerd at length, they force him to the Ground,
Unyielded as he was, and to the Pillar bound; 
And king Lycurgus, while he fought in Vain  
His Friend to free, was tumbld on the Plain. 
Who now laments but Palamon, compelld  
No more to try the Fortune of the Field!
And worse than Death, to view with hateful Eyes 
His Rivals Conquest, and renounce the Prize! 
The Royal Judge on his Tribunal placd, 
Who had beheld the Fight from first to last,  
Bad cease the War; pronouncing from on high
Arcite of Thebes had won the beauteous Emily. 
The Sound of Trumpets to the Voice replyd, 
And round the Royal Lists the Heralds cryd,  
Arcite of Thebes has won the beauteous Bride. 
The People rend the Skies with vast Applause;
All own the Chief, when Fortune owns the Cause. 
Arcite is ownd evn by the Gods above, 
And conquring Mars insults the Queen of Love.  
So laughd he when the rightful Titan faild, 
And Joves usurping Arms in Heavn prevaild.
Laughd all the Powrs who favour Tyranny;  
And all the Standing Army of the Sky. 
But Venus with dejected Eyes appears, 
And weeping, on the Lists, distilld her Tears; 
Her Will refusd, which grieves a Woman most,
And, in her Champion foild, the Cause of Love is lost. 
Till Saturn said, Fair Daughter, now be still,  
The blustring Fool has satisfid his Will;  
His Boon is given; his Knight has gaind the Day, 
But lost the Prize, th Arrears are yet to pay.
Thy Hour is come, and mine the Care shall be  
To please thy Knight, and set thy Promise free. 
Now while the Heralds run the Lists around, 
And Arcite, Arcite, Heavn and Earth resound, 
A Miracle (nor less it could be calld)
Their Joy with unexpected Sorrow palld.  
The Victor Knight had laid his Helm aside,  
Part for his Ease, the greater part for Pride:  
Bare-headed, popularly low he bowd,  
And paid the Salutations of the Crowd;
Then spurring, at full speed, ran endlong on  
Where Theseus sat on his Imperial Throne; 
Furious he drove, and upward cast his Eye,  
Where next the Queen was placd his Emily;  
Then passing, to the Saddle-bow he bent,
A sweet Regard the gracious Virgin lent:  
(For Women to the Brave an easie Prey,  
Still follow Fortune, where she leads the Way:) 
Just then, from Earth sprung out a flashing Fire, 
By Pluto sent, at Saturns bad Desire:
The startling Steed was seizd with sudden Fright,  
And, bounding, oer the Pummel cast the Knight: 
Forward he flew, and pitching on his Head,  
He quiverd with his Feet, and lay for Dead.  
Black was his Countnance in a little Space,
For all the Blood was gatherd in his Face. 
Help was at Hand; they reard him from the Ground,  
And from his cumbrous Arms his Limbs unbound; 
Then lancd a Vein, and watchd returning Breath; 
It came, but cloggd with Symptoms of his Death.
The Saddle-bow the Noble Parts had prest, 
All bruisd and mortifid his Manly Breast. 
Him still entrancd, and in a Litter laid, 
They bore from Field, and to his Bed conveyd.  
At length he wakd; and, with a feeble Cry,
The Word he first pronouncd was Emily. 
Mean time the King, though inwardly he mournd, 
In Pomp triumphant to the Town returnd,  
Attended by the Chiefs who fought the Field,  
(Now friendly mixd, and in one Troop compelld;)
Composd his Looks to counterfeited Cheer,  
And bade them not for Arcites Life to fear.  
But that which gladded all the Warriour Train,  
Though most were sorely wounded, none were slain. 
The Surgeons soon despoild em of their Arms,
And some with Salves they cure, and some with Charms; 
Foment the Bruises, and the Pains asswage 
And heal their inward Hurts with Sovreign Draughts of Sage.  
The King in Person visits all around, 
Comforts the Sick, congratulates the Sound;
Honours the Princely Chiefs, rewards the rest,  
And holds for thrice three Days a Royal Feast.  
None was disgracd; for Falling is no Shame;  
And Cowardice alone is Loss of Fame.  
The ventrous Knight is from the Saddle thrown,
But tis the Fault of Fortune, not his own. 
If Crowds and Palms the conquring Side adorn,  
The Victor under better Stars was born: 
The brave Man seeks not popular Applause, 
Nor overpowerd with Arms, deserts his Cause;
Unshamd, though foild, he does the best he can; 
Force is of Brutes, but Honour is of Man. 
Thus Theseus smild on all with equal Grace,  
And each was set according to his Place.  
With Ease were reconcild the diffring Parts,
For Envy never dwells in Noble Hearts.  
At length they took their Leave, the Time expird;  
Well pleasd; and to their sevral Homes retird. 
Mean while, the Health of Arcite still impairs; 
From Bad proceeds to Worse, and mocks the Leeches Cares:
Swoln is his Breast, his inward Pains increase; 
All Means are usd, and all without Success.  
The clotted Blood lies heavy on his Heart,  
Corrupts, and there remains in spite of Art:  
Nor breathing Veins nor Cupping will prevail;
All outward Remedies and inward fail: 
The Mold of Natures Fabrick is destroyd, 
Her Vessels discomposd, her Vertue void: 
The Bellows of his Lungs begins to swell: 
All out of frame is evry secret Cell,
Nor can the Good receive, nor Bad expel.  
Those breathing Organs thus within opprest, 
With Venom soon distend the Sinews of his Breast. 
Nought profits him to save abandond Life,  
Nor Vomits upward Aid, nor downward Laxatife.
The midmost Region betterd, and destroyd, 
When Nature cannot work, th Effect of Art is void. 
For Physick can but mend our crazie State,  
Patch an old Building, not a new create.  
Arcite is Doomd to die in all his Pride,
Must leave his Youth, and yield his beauteous Bride,  
Gaind hardly, against Right, and unenjoyd.  
When twas declard, all Hope of Life was past, 
Conscience, that of all Physick works the last, 
Causd him to send for Emily in haste.
With her, at his Desire, came Palamon;  
Then, on his Pillow raisd, he thus begun.  
No Language can express the smallest part 
Of what I feel, and suffer in my Heart, 
For you, whom best I love and value most;
But to your Service I bequeath my Ghost;  
Which, from this mortal Body when untyd, 
Unseen, unheard, shall hover at your Side;  
Nor fright you waking, nor your Sleep offend, 
But wait officious, and your Steps attend.
How I have lovd, excuse my faltring Tongue;  
My Spirits feeble, and my Pains are strong:  
This I may say, I only grieve to die, 
Because I lose my charming Emily. 
To die, when Heavn had put you in my Powr;
Fate could not chuse a more malicious Hour! 
What greater Curse coud envious Fortune give,  
Than just to die when I began to live!  
Vain Men, how vanishing a Bliss we crave, 
Now warm in Love, now withring in the Grave!
Never, O never more to see the Sun! 
Still dark, in a damp Vault, and still alone! 
This Fate is common; but I lose my Breath 
Near Bliss, and yet not blessd before my Death.  
Farewell; but take me dying in your Arms,
Tis all I can enjoy of all your Charms:  
This Hand I cannot but in Death resign; 
Ah, could I live! But while I live tis mine. 
I feel my End approach, and thus embracd 
Am pleasd to die; but hear me speak my last.
Ah! my sweet Foe, for you, and you alone, 
I broke my Faith with injurd Palamon.  
But Love the Sense of Right and Wrong confounds;  
Strong Love and proud Ambition have no Bounds.  
And much I doubt, shoud Heavn my Life prolong,
I shoud return to justifie my Wrong; 
For while my former Flames remain within, 
Repentance is but want of Powr to Sin. 
With mortal Hatred I pursud his Life,  
Nor he nor you were guilty of the Strife;
Nor I, but as I lovd; Yet all combind,  
Your Beauty, and my Impotence of Mind,  
And his concurrent Flame, that blew my Fire;  
For still our Kindred Souls had one Desire. 
He had a Moments Right in point of Time;
Had I seen first, then his had been the Crime.  
Fate made it mine, and justified his Right; 
Nor holds this Earth a more deserving Knight  
For Vertue, Valour, and for Noble Blood,  
Truth, Honour, all that is comprizd in Good;
So help me Heavn, in all the World is none 
So worthy to be lovd as Palamon. 
He loves you too; with such a holy Fire,  
As will not, cannot but with Life expire: 
Our vowd Affections both have often tryd,
Nor any Love but yours could ours divide, 
Then by my Loves inviolable Band, 
By my long Suffring, and my short Command, 
If eer you plight your Vows when I am gone,  
Have pity on the faithful Palamon.
This was his last; for Death came on amain, 
And exercisd below his Iron Reign; 
Then upward, to the Seat of Life he goes; 
Sense fled before him, what he touchd he froze:  
Yet coud he not his closing Eyes withdraw,
Though less and less of Emily he saw: 
So, speechless, for a little space he lay;  
Then graspd the Hand he held, and sighd his Soul away.  
But whither went his Soul, let such relate 
Who search the Secrets of the future State:
Divines can say but what themselves believe;  
Strong Proofs they have, but not demonstrative: 
For, were all plain, then all Sides must agree, 
And Faith it self be lost in Certainty. 
To live uprightly then is sure the best;
To save our selves, and not to damn the rest. 
The soul of Arcite went, where Heathens go, 
Who better live than we, though less they know. 
In Palamon a manly Grief appears; 
Silent, he wept, ashamd to show his Tears.
Emilia shriekd but once; and then, oppressd 
With Sorrow, sunk upon her Lovers Breast: 
Till Theseus in his Arms conveyd with Care 
Far from so sad a Sight, the swooning Fair. 
Twere Loss of Time her Sorrow to relate;
Ill bears the Sex a youthful Lovers Fate,  
When just approaching to the Nuptial State: 
But like a low-hung Cloud, it rains so fast,  
That all at once it falls, and cannot last. 
The Face of Things is changd, and Athens now.
That laughd so late, becomes the Scene of Woe: 
Matrons and Maids, both Sexes, evry State, 
With Tears lament the Knights untimely Fate. 
Not greater Grief in falling Troy was seen 
For Hectors Death; but Hector was not then.
Old Men with Dust deformd their hoary Hair,  
The Women beat their Breasts, their Cheeks they tear. 
Why wouldst thou go, with one consent they cry,  
When thou hadst Gold enough, and Emily! 
Theseus himself, who shoud have cheerd the Grief
Of others, wanted now the same Relief.  
Old Egeus only could revive his Son,  
Who various Changes of the World had known, 
And strange Vicissitudes of Humane Fate,  
Still altring, never in a steady State:
Good after Ill and after Pain, Delight, 
Alternate, like the Scenes of Day and Night.  
Since evry Man who lives is born to die, 
And none can boast sincere Felicity,  
With equal Mind, what happens, let us bear,
Nor joy, nor grieve too much for Things beyond our Care.  
Like Pilgrims to th appointed Place we tend; 
The Worlds an Inn, and Death the Journeys End. 
Evn Kings but play; and when their Part is done, 
Some other, worse or better, mount the Throne.
With words like these the Crowd was satisfid;  
And so they would have been, had Theseus dyd.  
But he, their King, was labring in his Mind, 
A fitting Place for Funral Pomps to find,  
Which were in Honour of the Dead designd.
And, after long Debate, at last he found  
(As Love it self had markd the Spot of Ground) 
That Grove for ever green, that conscious Lawnd,  
Where he with Palamon fought Hand to Hand:  
That where he fed his amorous Desires
With soft Complaints, and felt his hottest Fires, 
There other Flames might waste his Earthly Part,  
And burn his Limbs, where Love had burnd his Heart.  
This once resolvd, the Peasants were enjoind  
Sere Wood, and Firs, and dodderd Oaks to find.
With sounding Axes to the Grove they go,  
Fell, split, and lay the Fewel on a Row, 
Vulcanian Food: A Bier is next prepard,  
On which the lifeless Body should be reard,  
Coverd with Cloth of Gold, on which was laid
The Corps of Arcite, in like Robes arrayd. 
White Gloves were on his Hands, and on his Head 
A Wreath of Laurel, mixd with Myrtle, spread.  
A Sword keen-edgd within his Right he held,  
The warlike Emblem of the conquerd Field:
Bare was his manly Visage on the Bier;  
Menacd his Countenance; evn in Death severe.  
Then to the Palace-Hall they bore the Knight, 
To lie in solemn State, a Publick Sight.  
Groans, Cries, and Howlings fill the Crowded Place,
And unaffected Sorrow sat on evry Face.  
Sad Palamon above the rest appears, 
In Sable Garments, dewd with gushing Tears:  
His Aubourn Locks on either Shoulder flowd,  
Which to the Funral of his Friend he vowd:
But Emily, as Chief, was next his Side, 
A Virgin-Widow and a Mourning Bride.  
And that the Princely Obsequies might be  
Performd according to his high Degree, 
The Steed, that bore him living to the Fight,
Was trappd with polishd Steel, all shining bright,  
And coverd with th Atchievements of the Knight. 
The Riders rode abreast, and one his Shield,  
His Lance of Cornel-wood another held;  
The third his Bow, and, glorious to behold,
The costly Quiver, all of burnishd Gold. 
The Noblest of the Grecians next appear,  
And weeping, on their Shoulders bore the Bier;  
With sober Pace they marchd, and often staid,  
And through the Master-Street the Corps conveyd.
The Houses to their Tops with Black were spread,  
And evn the Pavements were with Mourning hid.  
The Right-side of the Pall old Egeus kept,  
And on the Left the Royal Theseus wept; 
Each bore a Golden Bowl of Work Divine,
With Honey filld, and Milk, and mixd with ruddy Wine. 
Then Palamon, the Kinsman of the Slain, 
And after him appeard th Illustrious Train: 
To grace the Pomp came Emily the Bright,  
With coverd Fire, the Funral Pile to light.
With high Devotion was the Service made 
And all the Rites of Pagan-Honour paid: 
So lofty was the Pile, a Parthian Bow,  
With Vigour drawn, must send the Shaft below. 
The Bottom was full twenty Fathom broad,
With crackling Straw beneath in due Proportion strowd. 
The Fabrick seemd a Wood of rising Green,  
With Sulphur and Bitumen cast between,  
To feed the Flames: The Trees were unctuous Fir,  
And Mountain-Ash, the Mother of the Spear;
The Mourner Eugh and Builder Oak were there: 
The Beech, the swimming Alder, and the Plane, 
Hard Box, and Linden of a softer Grain, 
And Laurels, which the Gods for Conquring Chiefs ordain. 
How they were rankd shall rest untold by me,
With nameless Nymphs that lived in evry Tree;  
Nor how the Dryads and the Woodland Train,  
Disherited, ran howling oer the Plain: 
Nor how the Birds to Foreign Seats repaird,  
Or Beasts that bolted out, and saw the Forest bard:
Nor how the Ground now cleard with gastly Fright 
Beheld the sudden Sun, a Stranger to the Light. 
The Straw, as first I said, was laid below: 
Of Chips and Sere-wood was the second Row;  
The third of Greens, and Timber newly felld;
The Fourth high Stage the fragrant Odours held, 
And Pearls, and precious Stones, and rich Array:  
In midst of which, embalmd, the Body lay.  
The Service sung, the Maid with mourning Eyes 
The Stubble fird; the smouldring Flames arise:
This Office done, she sunk upon the Ground; 
But what she spoke, recoverd from her Swoond,  
I want the Wit in moving Words to dress;  
But by themselves the tender Sex may guess. 
While the devouring Fire was burning fast,
Rich Jewels in the Flame the Wealthy cast;  
And some their Shields, and some their Lances threw,  
And gave the Warriours Ghost a Warriours Due.  
Full Bowls of Wine, of Honey, Milk and Blood  
Were pourd upon the Pile of burning Wood,
And hissing Flames receive, and hungry lick the Food. 
Then thrice the mounted Squadrons ride around 
The Fire, and Arcites Name they thrice resound:  
Hail, and Farewell, they shouted thrice amain,  
Thrice facing to the Left, and thrice they turnd again:
Still, as they turnd, they beat their clattring Shields;  
The Women mix their Cries; and Clamour fills the Fields.  
The warlike Wakes continud all the Night,  
And Funral Games were played at new-returning Light: 
Who naked wrestld best, besmeard with Oil,
Or who with Gantlets gave or took the Foil, 
I will not tell you, nor woud you attend;  
But briefly haste to my long Stories End. 
I pass the rest; the Year was fully mournd,  
And Palamon long since to Thebes returnd:
When, by the Grecians general Consent,  
At Athens Theseus held his Parliament;  
Among the Laws that passd, it was decreed, 
That conquerd Thebes from Bondage shoud be freed; 
Reserving Homage to th Athenian throne,
To which the Sovreign summond Palamon.  
Unknowing of the Cause, he took his Way,  
Mournful in Mind, and still in Black Array, 
The Monarch mounts the Throne, and, placd on high, 
Commands into the Court the beauteous Emily:
So calld, she came; the Senate rose, and paid  
Becoming Revrence to the Royal Maid. 
And first, soft Whispers through th Assembly went; 
With silent Wonder then they watchd th Event; 
All hushd, the King arose with awful Grace;
Deep Thought was in his Breast, and Counsel in his Face.  
At length he sighd; and having first prepard  
Th attentive Audience, thus his Will declard. 
The Cause and Spring of Motion, from above  
Hung down on Earth the Golden Chain of Love:
Great was th Effect, and high was his Intent,  
When Peace among the jarring Seeds he sent; 
Fire, Flood, and Earth, and Air by this were bound, 
And Love, the common Link, the new Creation crownd.  
The Chain still holds; for though the Forms decay,
Eternal Matter never wears away:  
The same First Mover certain Bounds has placd, 
How long those perishable Forms shall last; 
Nor can they last beyond the Time assignd  
By that All-seeing and All-making Mind:
Shorten their Hours they may; for Will is free, 
But never pass th appointed Destiny. 
So Men oppressd, when weary of their Breath, 
Throw off the Burden, and subborn their Death.  
Then, since those Forms begin, and have their End,
On some unalterd Cause they sure depend: 
Parts of the Whole are we, but God the Whole, 
Who gives us Life, and animating Soul.  
For Nature cannot from a Part derive  
That Being, which the Whole can only give:
He perfect, stable; but imperfect We, 
Subject to Change, and diffrent in Degree; 
Plants, Beasts, and Man; and, as our Organs are,  
We more or less of his Perfection share.  
But, by a long Descent, th Etherial Fire
Corrupts; and Forms, the mortal Part, expire. 
As he withdraws his Vertue, so they pass, 
And the same Matter makes another Mass: 
This Law th Omniscient Powr was pleasd to give,  
That evry Kind should by Succession live;
That Individuals die, his Will ordains; 
The propagated Species still remains. 
The Monarch Oak, the Patriarch of the Trees,  
Shoots rising up, and spreads by slow Degrees;  
Three Centuries he grows, and three he stays,
Supreme in State; and in three more decays: 
So wears the paving Pebble in the Street, 
And Towns and Towrs their fatal Period meet: 
So Rivers, rapid once, now naked lie, 
Forsaken of their Springs; and leave their Channels dry.
So Man, at first a Drop, dilates with Heat, 
Then formd, the little Heart begins to beat; 
Secret he feeds, unknowing in the Cell; 
At length, for Hatching ripe, he breaks the Shell,  
And struggles into Breath, and cries for Aid;
Then, helpless, in his Mothers Lap is laid.  
He creeps, he walks, and, issuing into Man, 
Grudges their Life from whence his own began: 
Retchless of Laws, affects to rule alone, 
Anxious to reign, and restless on the Throne;
First vegetive, then feels, and reasons last; 
Rich of Three Souls, and lives all three to waste.  
Some thus; but thousands more in Flowr of Age: 
For few arrive to run the latter Stage. 
Sunk in the first, in Battel some are slain,
And others whelmd beneath the stormy Main. 
What makes all this, but Jupiter the King,  
At whose Command we perish, and we spring?  
Then tis our best, since thus ordaind to die, 
To make a Vertue of Necessity.
Take what he gives, since to rebel is vain; 
The Bad grows better, which we well sustain:  
And coud we chuse the Time, and chuse aright,  
Tis best to die, our Honour at the height.  
When we have done our Ancestors no Shame,
But servd our Friends, and well securd our Fame;  
Then should we wish our happy Life to close,  
And leave no more for Fortune to dispose: 
So should we make our Death a glad Relief 
From future Shame, from Sickness, and from Grief:
Enjoying while we live the present Hour,  
And dying in our Excellence, and Flowr.  
Then round our Death-bed every Friend shoud run, 
And joy us of our Conquest, early won; 
While the malicious World, with envious Tears,
Shoud grudge our happy End, and wish it Theirs.  
Since then our Arcite is with Honour dead,  
Why shoud we mourn, that he so soon is freed,  
Or call untimely, what the Gods decreed?  
With Grief as just a Friend may be deplord,
From a foul Prison to free Air restord.  
Ought he to thank his Kinsman, or his Wife, 
Coud Tears recall him into wretched Life!  
Their Sorrow hurts themselves; on him is lost;  
And worse than both, offends his happy Ghost.
What then remains, but after past Annoy 
To take the good Vicissitude of Joy?  
To thank the gracious Gods for what they give,  
Possess our Souls, and, while we live, to live? 
Ordain we then two Sorrows to combine,
And in one Point th Extremes of Grief to join; 
That thence resulting Joy may be renewed, 
As jarring Notes in Harmony conclude. 
Then I propose that Palamon shall be  
In Marriage joind with beauteous Emily;
For which already I have gained the Assent  
Of my free People in full Parliament. 
Long Love to her has borne the faithful Knight, 
And well deservd, had Fortune done him Right:  
Tis Time to mend her Fault; since Emily
By Arcites Death from former Vows is free: 
If you, Fair Sister, ratifie the Accord,  
And take him for your Husband, and your Lord.  
Tis no Dishonour to confer your Grace  
On one descended from a Royal Race:
And were he less, yet Years of Service past 
From grateful Souls exact Reward at last: 
Pity is Heavns and yours; Nor can she find  
A Throne so soft as in a Womans Mind. 
He said; she blushd; and as oerawd by Might,
Seemd to give Theseus what she gave the Knight.  
Then turning to the Theban, thus he said: 
Small Arguments are needful to persuade 
Your Temper to comply with my Command;  
And speaking thus, he gave Emilias Hand.
Smild Venus, to behold her own true Knight 
Obtain the Conquest, though he lost the Fight,  
And blessd with Nuptial Bliss the sweet laborious Night. 
Eros, and Anteros, on either Side,  
One fird the Bridegroom, and one warmd the Bride;
And long-attending Hymen from above 
Showrd on the Bed the whole Idalian Grove. 
All of a Tenour was their After-Life, 
No Day discolourd with Domestick Strife; 
No Jealousie, but mutual Truth believd,
Secure Repose, and Kindness undeceivd. 
Thus Heavn, beyond the Compass of his Thought,  
Sent him the Blessing he so dearly bought.  
So may the Queen of Love long Duty bless, 
And all true Lovers find the same Success.

**
To her Grace the Duchess of Ormond
***

The Bard who first adornd our Native Tongue  
Tund to his British Lyre this ancient Song:  
Which Homer might without a Blush reherse,  
And leaves a doubtful Palm in Virgils Verse: 
He matchd their Beauties, where they most excell;
Of Love sung better, and of Arms as well. 
Vouchsafe, Illustrious Ormond, to behold  
What Powr the Charms of Beauty had of old; 
Nor wonder if such Deeds of Arms were done, 
Inspird by two fair Eyes that sparkled like your own.
If Chaucer by the best Idea wrought,  
And Poets can divine each others Thought,  
The fairest Nymph before his Eyes he set; 
And then the fairest was Plantagenet; 
Who three contending Princes made her Prize,
And ruld the Rival-Nations with her Eyes:  
Who left Immortal Trophies of her Fame, 
And to the Noblest Order gave the Name. 
Like Her, of equal Kindred to the Throne, 
You keep her Conquests, and extend your own:
As when the Stars, in their Etherial Race,  
At length have rolld around the Liquid Space,  
At certain Periods they resume their Place, 
From the same Point of Heavn their Course advance, 
And move in Measures of their former Dance;
Thus, after length of Ages, she returns,  
Restord in you, and the same Place adorns: 
Or you perform her Office in the Sphere,  
Born of her Blood, and make a new Platonick Year. 
O true Plantagenet, O Race Divine,
(For Beauty still is fatal to the Line,)  
Had Chaucer livd that Angel-Face to view,  
Sure he had drawn his Emily from You; 
Or had You livd to judge the doubtful Right, 
Your Noble Palamon had been the Knight:
And Conquring Theseus from his Side had sent 
Your Genrous Lord, to guide the Theban Government  
Time shall accomplish that; and I shall see 
A Palamon in him, in You an Emily.  
Already have the Fates your Path prepard,
And sure Presage your future Sway declard: 
When Westward, like the Sun, you took your Way, 
And from benighted Britain bore the Day,  
Blue Triton gave the Signal from the Shore, 
The ready Nereids heard, and swam before
To smooth the Seas; a soft Etesian Gale 
But just inspird, and gently swelld the Sail; 
Portunus took his Turn, whose ample Hand  
Heavd up the lightend Keel, and sunk the Sand,  
And steerd the sacred Vessel safe to Land.
The Land, if not restraind, had met Your Way,  
Projected out a Neck, and jutted to the Sea.  
Hibernia, prostrate at your Feet, adord  
In You the Pledge of her expected Lord; 
Due to her Isle; a venerable Name;
His Father and his Grandsire known to Fame; 
Awd by that House, accustomd to command,  
The sturdy Kerns in due subjection stand, 
Nor hear the Reins in any Foreign Hand. 
At Your Approach, they crowded to the Port;
And scarcely Landed, You create a Court:  
As Ormonds Harbinger, to You they run, 
For Venus is the Promise of the Sun.  
The Waste of Civil Wars, their Towns destroyd, 
Pales unhonourd, Ceres unemployd,
Were all forgot; and one Triumphant Day 
Wipd all the Tears of three Campaigns away. 
Blood, Rapines, Massacres, were cheaply bought, 
So mighty Recompense Your Beauty brought. 
As when the Dove returning bore the Mark
Of Earth restord to the long-labring Ark, 
The Relicks of Mankind, secure of Rest, 
Opd every Window to receive the Guest, 
And the fair Bearer of the Message blessd; 
So, when You came, with loud repeated Cries,
The Nation took an Omen from your Eyes, 
And God advancd his Rainbow in the Skies,  
To sign inviolable Peace restord;  
The Saints with solemn Shouts proclaimd the new accord.  
When at Your second Coming You appear,
(For I foretell that Millenary Year)  
The sharpend Share shall vex the Soil no more, 
But Earth unbidden shall produce her Store: 
The Land shall laugh, the circling Ocean smile, 
And Heavns Indulgence bless the Holy Isle.
Heavn from all Ages has reservd for You 
That happy Clime, which Venom never knew; 
Or if it had been there, Your Eyes alone  
Have Powr to chase all Poyson, but their own.  
Now in this Interval, which Fate has cast
Betwixt Your Future Glories and Your Past,  
This Pause of Powr, tis Irelands Hour to mourn; 
While England celebrates Your safe Return,  
By which You seem the Seasons to command, 
And bring our Summers back to their forsaken Land.
The Vanquishd Isle our Leisure must attend,  
Till the Fair Blessing we vouchsafe to send;  
Nor can we spare You long, though often we may lend.  
The Dove was twice employd abroad, before  
The World was dryd; and she returnd no more.
Nor dare we trust so soft a Messenger,  
New from her Sickness, to that Northern Air;  
Rest here a while, Your Lustre to restore,  
That they may see You, as You shone before; 
For yet, th Eclipse not wholly past, You wade
Thro some Remains and Dimness of a Shade.  
A Subject in his Prince may claim a Right,  
Nor suffer him with Strength impaird to fight; 
Till Force returns, his Ardour we restrain, 
And curb his Warlike Wish to cross the Main.
Now past the Danger, let the Learnd begin  
Th Enquiry, where Disease could enter in;  
How those malignant Atoms forcd their Way, 
What in the Faultless Frame they found to make their Prey?  
Where evry Element was weighd so well,
That Heavn alone, who mixd the Mass, could tell 
Which of the Four Ingredients could rebel;  
And Where, imprisond in so sweet a Cage, 
A Soul might well be pleasd to pass an Age.  
And yet the fine Materials made it weak;
Porcelain by being Pure, is apt to break. 
Evn to Your Breast the Sickness durst aspire,  
And forcd from that fair Temple to retire, 
Profanely set the Holy Place on Fire. 
In vain Your Lord, like young Vespasian, mournd,
When the fierce Flames the Sanctuary burnd,  
And I prepard to pay in Verses rude  
A most detested Act of Gratitude: 
Evn this had been Your Elegy, which now  
Is offerd for Your Health, the Table of my Vow.
Your Angel sure our Morleys Mind inspird, 
To find the Remedy Your Ill requird; 
As once the Macedon, by Joves Decree,  
Was taught to dream an Herb for Ptolomee: 
Or Heavn, which had such Over-cost bestowd
As scarce it could afford to Flesh and Blood, 
So likd the Frame, he would not work anew, 
To save the Charges of another You. 
Or by his middle Science did he steer,  
And saw some great contingent Good appear,
Well worth a Miracle to keep You here,  
And for that End preservd the precious Mould,  
Which all the Future Ormonds was to hold; 
And meditated, in his better Mind 
An Heir from You who may redeem the failing Kind.
Blessd be the Power which has at once restord 
The Hopes of lost Succession to Your Lord;  
Joy to the first, and last of each Degree,  
Vertue to Courts, and, what I longd to see,  
To You the Graces, and the Muse to me.
O daughter of the Rose, whose Cheeks unite  
The diffring Titles of the Red and White;  
Who Heavns alternate Beauty well display,  
The Blush of Morning, and the Milky Way;  
Whose Face is Paradise, but fencd from Sin:
For God in either Eye has placed a Cherubin.  
All is Your Lords alone; evn absent, He 
Employs the Care of Chast Penelope. 
For him You waste in Tears Your Widowd Hours,  
For him Your curious Needle paints the Flowrs;
Such Works of Old Imperial Dames were taught, 
Such for Ascanius, fair Elisa wrought.  
The soft Recesses of Your Hours improve 
The Three fair Pledges of Your Happy Love:  
All other Parts of Pious Duty done,
You owe Your Ormond nothing but a son,  
To fill in future Times his Fathers Place, 
And wear the Garter of his Mothers Race.

**
The Cock and the Fox, or the Tale of the Nun's Priest
***

THERE livd, as Authors tell, in Days of Yore,  
A Widow, somewhat old, and very poor: 
Deep in a Cell her Cottage lonely stood,  
Well thatchd, and under covert of a Wood.  
This Dowager, on whom my Tale I found,
Since last she laid her Husband in the Ground,  
A simple sober Life in patience led,  
And had but just enough to buy her Bread: 
But Huswifing the little Heavn had lent, 
She duly paid a Groat for Quarter-Rent;
And pinchd her Belly, with her Daughters two,  
To bring the Year about with much ado.  
The Cattel in her Homestead were three Sows,  
An Ewe called Mally, and three brinded Cows.  
Her Parlor-Window stuck with Herbs around
Of savry Smell; and Rushes strewed the Ground. 
A Maple-Dresser in her Hall she had,  
On which full many a slender Meal she made: 
For no delicious Morsel passd her Throat;  
According to her Cloth she cut her Coat:
No paynant Sawce she knew, no costly Treat, 
Her Hunger gave a Relish to her Meat: 
A sparing Diet did her Health assure; 
Or sick, a Pepper-Posset was her Cure.  
Before the Day was done, her Work she sped,
And never went by Candle-light to Bed;  
With Exercise she sweat ill Humors out; 
Her Dancing was not hinderd by the Gout. 
Her Poverty was glad; her Heart content,  
Nor knew she what the Spleen or Vapors meant.
Of Wine she never tasted through the Year,  
But White and Black was all her homely Chear; 
Brown Bread, and Milk (but first she skimd her bowls)  
And Rashers of sindgd Bacon on the Coals.  
On Holy-Days, an Egg or two at most;
But her Ambition never reachd to roast.  
A Yard she had with Pales enclosd about, 
Some high, some low, and a dry Ditch without. 
Within this Homestead, livd without a Peer,  
For crowing loud, the noble Chanticleer:
So hight her Cock, whose singing did surpass  
The merry Notes of Organs at the Mass.  
More certain was the crowing of a Cock  
To number Hours, than is an Abbey-clock;  
And sooner than the Mattin-Bell was rung,
He clapd his Wings upon his Roost, and sung: 
For when Degrees fifteen ascended right,  
By sure Instinct he knew twas One at Night.  
High was his Comb, and Coral-red withal,  
In dents embatteld like a Castle-Wall;
His Bill was Raven-black, and shon like Jet,  
Blue were his Legs, and Orient were his Feet: 
White were his Nails, like Silver to behold,  
His Body glittring like the burnishd Gold.  
This gentle Cock, for solace of his Life,
Six Misses had beside his lawful Wife;  
Scandal, that spares no King, tho neer so good, 
Says, they were all of his own Flesh and Blood: 
His Sisters both by Sire, and Mothers Side,  
And sure their Likeness showd them near allyd.
But make the worst, the Monarch did no more 
Than all the Ptolomeys had done before:  
When Incest is for Intrest of a Nation,  
Tis made no Sin by Holy Dispensation.  
Some Lines have been maintaind by this alone,
Which by their common Ugliness are known. 
But passing this as from our Tale apart,  
Dame Partlet was the Soveraign of his Heart:  
Ardent in Love, outragious in his Play, 
He featherd her a hundred times a Day;
And she, that was not only passing fair,  
But was withal discreet, and debonair,  
Resolvd the passive Doctrin to fulfil, 
Tho loath, and let him work his wicked Will: 
At Board and Bed was affable and kind,
According as their Marriage-Vow did bind, 
And as the Churches Precept had enjoind. 
Evn since she was a Sennight old, they say 
Was chast, and humble to her dying Day, 
Nor Chick nor Hen was known to disobey.
By this her. Husbands Heart she did obtain;  
What cannot Beauty joind with Virtue gain! 
She was his only Joy, and he her Pride: 
She, when he walkd, went pecking by his Side;  
If, spurning up the Ground, he sprung a Corn,
The Tribute in his Bill to her was born.  
But oh! what Joy it was to hear him sing  
In Summer, when the Day began to spring,  
Stretching his Neck, and warbling in his Throat,  
Solus cum Sola, then was all his Note.
For in the Days of Yore, the Birds of Parts 
Were bred to Speak, and Sing, and learn the libral Arts. 
It happd that perching on the Parlor beam  
Amidst his Wives he had a deadly Dream, 
Just at the Dawn, and sighd, and groand so fast,
As every Breath he drew would be his last.  
Dame Partlet, ever nearest to his Side, 
Heard all his piteous Moan, and how he cryd  
For help from Gods and Men: And sore aghast 
She Peckd and pulld, and wakend him at last.
Dear Heart, said she, for Love of Heavn declare  
Your Pain, and make me Partner of your Care.  
You groan, Sir, ever since the Morning-light, 
As something had disturbd your noble Spright.  
And, Madam, well I might, said Chanticleer,
Never was Shrovetide-Cock in such a Fear. 
Evn still I run all over in a Sweat, 
My Princely Senses not recoverd yet. 
For such a Dream I had of dire Portent, 
That much I fear my Body will be shent:
It bodes I shall have Wars and woful Strife,  
Or in a loathsom Dungeon end my Life. 
Know, Dame, I dreamt within my troubld Breast, 
That in our Yard I saw a murdrous Beast, 
That on my Body would have made Arrest.
With waking Eyes I neer beheld his Fellow, 
His Colour was betwixt a Red and Yellow:  
Tippd was his Tail, and both his pricking Ears 
With black; and much unlike his other Hairs:  
The rest, in Shape a Beagles Whelp throughout,
With broader Forehead, and a sharper Snout: 
Deep in his Front were sunk his glowing Eyes, 
That yet, methinks, I see him with Surprize.  
Reach out your Hand, I drop with clammy Sweat,  
And lay it to my Heart, and feel it beat.
Now fy for Shame, quoth she, by Heavn above, 
Thou hast for ever lost thy Ladies Love.  
No Woman can endure a Recreant Knight,  
He must be bold by Day, and free by Night:  
Our Sex desires a Husband or a Friend,
Who can our Honour and his own defend;  
Wise, Hardy, Secret, libral of his Purse;  
A Fool is nauseous, but a Coward worse: 
No bragging Coxcomb, yet no baffled Knight. 
How darst thou talk of Love, and darst not Fight?
How darst thou tell thy Dame thou art afferd? 
Hast thou no manly Heart, and hasta Beard?  
If ought from fearful Dreams may be divind,  
They signify a Cock of Dunghill-kind. 
All Dreams, as in old Gallen I have read,
Are from Repletion and Complexion bred; 
From rising Fumes of indigested Food, 
And noxious Humors that infect the Blood: 
And sure, my Lord, if I can read aright,  
These foolish Fancies you have had to Night
Are certain Symptoms (in the canting Style) 
Of boiling Choler and abounding Bile: 
This yellow Gaul that in your Stomach floats, 
Ingenders all these visionary Thoughts. 
When Choler overflows, then Dreams are bred
Of Flames, and all the Family of Red; 
Red Dragons, and red Beasts in Sleep we view; 
For Humors are distinguishd by their Hue.  
From hence we Dream of Wars and Warlike Things, 
And Wasps and Hornets with their double Wings.
Choler adust congeals our Blood with fear;  
Then black Bulls toss us, and black Devils tear.  
In sanguine airy Dreams aloft we bound; 
With Rhumes oppressd, we sink in Rivers drownd. 
More I could say, but thus conclude my Theme,
The dominating Humour makes the Dream.  
Cato was in his time accounted Wise,  
And he condemns them all for empty Lies.  
Take my Advice, and when we fly to Ground 
With Laxatives preserve your Body sound,
And purge the peccant Humors that abound. 
I should be loath to lay you on a Bier; 
And though there lives no Pothecary near,  
I dare for once prescribe for your Disease, 
And save long Bills, and a damnd Doctors Fees.
Two Soveraign Herbs, which I by practise know,  
Are both at hand (for in our Yard they grow;) 
On Peril of my Soul shall rid you wholly  
Of yellow Choler, and of Melancholy:  
You must both Purge, and Vomit; but obey,
And for the Love of Heavn make no delay. 
Since hot and dry in your Complexion join,  
Beware the Sun when in a vernal Sign; 
For when he mounts exalted in the Ram,  
If then he finds your Body in a Flame,
Replete with Choler, I dare lay a Groat,  
A Tertian Ague is at least your Lot.  
Perhaps a Fever (which the Gods forefend) 
May bring your Youth to some untimely End.  
And therefore, Sir, as you desire to live,
A Day or two before your Laxative,  
Take just three Worms, nor under nor above, 
Because the Gods unequal Numbers love,  
These Digestives prepare you for your Purge,  
Of Fumetery, Centaury, and Spurge,
And of Ground-Ivy add a Leaf, or two, 
All which within our Yard or Garden grow. 
Eat these, and be, my Lord, of better Cheer;  
Your Fathers Son was never born to fear. 
Madam, quoth he, Grammercy for your Care,
But Cato, whom you quoted, you may spare; 
Tis true, a wise, and worthy Man he seems, 
And (as you say) gave no belief to Dreams:  
But other Men of more Authority,  
And, by th Immortal Powers as wise as He,
Maintain, with sounder Sense, that Dreams forebode; 
For Homer plainly says they come from God.  
Nor Cato said it: But some modern Fool  
Imposd in Catos Name on Boys at School. 
Believe me, Madam, Morning Dreams foreshow
Th Events of Things, and future Weal or Woe: 
Some Truths are not by Reason to be tryd,  
But we have sure Experience for our Guide.  
An ancient Author, equal with the best, 
Relates this Tale of Dreams among the rest.
Two Friends, or Brothers, with devout Intent, 
On some far Pilgrimage together went. 
It happend so that, when the Sun was down, 
They just arrivd by twilight at a Town;  
That Day had been the baiting of a Bull,
Twas at a Feast, and evry Inn so full,  
That no void Room in Chamber, or on Ground, 
And but one sorry Bed was to be found,  
And that so little it would hold but one, 
Though till this Hour they never lay alone.
So were they forcd to part; one stayd behind, 
His Fellow sought what Lodging he could find: 
At last he found a Stall where Oxen stood,  
And that he rather chose than lie abroad. 
Twas in a farther Yard without a Door;
But, for his ease, well litterd was the Floor. 
His Fellow, who the narrow Bed had kept,  
Was weary, and without a Rocker slept:  
Supine he snord; but in the Dead of Night, 
He dreamt his Friend appeard before his Sight,
Who, with a ghastly Look and doleful Cry, 
Said, Help me, Brother, or this Night I die:  
Arise, and help, before all Help be vain, 
Or in an Oxes Stall I shall be slain. 
Rowzd from his Rest, he wakend in a Start,
Shivring with Horror, and with aking Heart:  
At length to cure himself by Reason tries;  
Tis but a Dream, and what are Dreams but Lies? 
So thinking changd his Side, and closed his Eyes.  
His Dream returns; his Friend appears again:
The Murdrers come, now help, or I am slain:  
Twas but a Vision still, and Visions are but vain. 
He dreamt the third: But now his Friend appeard, 
Pale, naked, piercd with Wounds, with Blood besmeard: 
Thrice warnd, awake, said he; Relief is late,
The Deed is done; but thou revenge my Fate: 
Tardy of Aid, unseal thy heavy Eyes,  
Awake, and with the dawning Day arise:  
Take to the Western Gate thy ready way, 
For by that Passage they my Corps convey:
My Corps is in a Tumbril laid; among  
The Filth and Ordure, and enclosd with Dung. 
That Cart arrest, and raise a common Cry, 
For sacred hunger of my Gold I die; 
Then showd his grisly Wounds; and last he drew
A piteous Sigh; and took a long Adieu.  
The frighted Friend arose by break of Day,  
And found the Stall where late his Fellow lay.  
Then of his impious Host inquiring more,  
Was answerd that his Guest was gone before:
Muttring, he went, said he, by Morning-light, 
And much complaind of his ill Rest by Night. 
This raisd Suspicion in the Pilgrims Mind;  
Because all Hosts are of an evil Kind,  
And oft, to share the Spoil, with Robbers joind.
His Dream confirmd his Thought: with troubled look 
Straight to the Western-Gate his Way he took; 
There, as his Dream foretold, a Cart he found,  
That carryd Composs forth to dung the Ground.  
This when the Pilgrim saw, he stretchd his Throat,
And cryd out Murther with a yelling Note.  
My murtherd Fellow in this Cart lies dead, 
Vengeance and Justice on the Villains Head.  
You, Magistrates, who sacred Laws dispense, 
On you I call to punish this Offence.
The Word thus givn, within a little Space  
The Mob came roaring out, and throngd the Place. 
All in a trice they cast the Cart to Ground,  
And in the Dung the murtherd Body found; 
Though breathless, warm, and reeking from the Wound.
Good Heavn, whose darling Attribute we find  
Is boundless Grace, and Mercy to Mankind, 
Abhors the Cruel; and the Deeds of Night  
By wondrous Ways reveals in open Light:  
Murther may pass unpunishd for a time,
But tardy Justice will oertake the Crime 
And oft a speedier pain the Guilty feels, 
The Hue and Cry of Heavn pursues him at the Heels, 
Fresh from the Fact; as in the present Case;  
The Criminals are seizd upon the Place:
Carter and Host confronted Face to Face.  
Stiff in denial, as the Law appoints, 
On Engins they distend their torturd Joints: 
So was confession forcd, th Offence was known,  
And publick Justice on th Offenders done.
Here may you see that Visions are to dread: 
And in the Page that follows this I read  
Of two young Merchants, whom the hope of Gain 
Inducd in Partnership to cross the Main: 
Waiting till willing Winds their Sails supplyd,
Within a Trading-Town they long abide,  
Full fairly situate on a Havens side.  
One Evening it befel that looking out,  
The Wind they long had wishd was come about: 
Well pleasd they went to Rest; and if the Gale
Till Morn continud, both resolvd to sail. 
But as together in a Bed they lay,  
The younger had a Dream at break of Day.  
A Man, he thought, stood frowning at his side,  
Who warnd him for his Safety to provide,
Not put to Sea, but safe on Shore abide.  
I come, thy Genius, to command thy stay;  
Trust not the Winds, for fatal is the Day,  
And Death unhopd attends the watry way.  
The Vision said: And vanishd from his Sight;
The Dreamer wakend in a mortal Fright; 
Then pulld his drowzy Neighbour, and declard  
What in his Slumber he had seen, and heard. 
His Friend smild scornful, and, with proud contempt, 
Rejects as idle what his Fellow dreamt.
Stay, who will stay: For me no Fears restrain,  
Who follow Mercury the God of Gain: 
Let each Man do as to his Fancy seems,  
I wait not, I, till you have better Dreams. 
Dreams are but Interludes, which Fancy makes;
When Monarch-Reason sleeps, this Mimick wakes:  
Compounds a Medley of disjointed Things,  
A Mob of Coblers and a Court of Kings:  
Light Fumes are merry, grosser Fumes are sad; 
Both are the reasonable Soul run mad:
And many monstrous Forms in Sleep we see, 
That neither were, nor are, nor eer can be.  
Sometimes, forgotten Things long cast behind  
Rush forward in the Brain, and come to mind.  
The Nurses Legends are for Truths receivd,
And the Man dreams but what the Boy believd. 
Sometimes we but rehearse a former Play,  
The Night restores our Actions done by Day; 
As Hounds in sleep will open for their Prey.  
In short, the Farce of Dreams is of a piece,
Chimeras all; and more absurd, or less.  
You, who believe in Tales, abide alone, 
What eer I get this Voyage is my own.  
Thus while he spoke he heard the shouting Crew  
That calld aboard and took his last adieu.
The Vessel went before a merry Gale,  
And for quick Passage put on evry Sail:  
But when least feard, and evn in open Day,  
The Mischief overtook her in the way: 
Whether she sprung a Leak, I cannot find,
Or whether she was overset with Wind; 
Or that some Rock below, her bottom rent; 
But down at once with all her Crew she went;  
Her Fellow Ships from far her Loss descryd;  
But only she was sunk, and all were safe beside.
By this Example you are taught again, 
That Dreams and Visions are not always vain:  
But if, dear Partlet, you are yet in doubt, 
Another Tale shall make the former out. 
Kenelm, the Son of Kenulph, Mercias King,
Whose holy Life the Legends loudly sing,  
Warnd, in a Dream, his Murther did foretel 
From Point to Point as after it befel:  
All Circumstances to his Nurse he told, 
(A Wonder, from a Child of sevn Years old)
The Dream with Horror heard, the good old Wife  
From Treason counselld him to guard his Life:  
But close to keep the Secret in his Mind, 
For a Boys Vision small Belief would find. 
The pious Child, by Promise bound, obeyd,
Nor was the fatal Murther long delayd: 
By Quenda slain, he fell before his time, 
Made a young Martyr by his Sisters Crime.  
The Tale is told by venerable Bede, 
Which, at your better leisure, you may read.
Macrobius too relates the Vision sent 
To the great Scipio with the famd event; 
Objections makes, but after makes Replies,  
And adds, that Dreams are often Prophecies. 
Of Daniel you may read in Holy Writ,
Who, when the King his Vision did forget, 
Coud Word for Word the wondrous Dream repeat. 
Nor less of Patriarch Joseph understand,  
Who by a Dream inslavd th Egyptian Land,  
The Years of Plenty and of Dearth foretold,
When, for their Bread, their Liberty they sold. 
Nor must th exalted Buttler be forgot, 
Nor he whose Dream presagd his hanging Lot.  
And did not Crsus the same Death foresee,  
Raisd in his Vision on a lofty Tree?
The wife of Hector in his utmost Pride, 
Dreamt of his Death the Night before he dyd: 
Well was he warnd from Battle to refrain;  
But Men to Death decreed are warnd in vain:  
He dard the Dream, and by his fatal Foe was slain.
Much more I know, which I forbear to speak, 
For see the ruddy Day begins to break:  
Let this suffice, that plainly I foresee  
My Dream was bad, and bodes Adversity:  
But neither Pills nor Laxatives I like,
They only serve to make a well-man sick:  
Of these his Gain the sharp Phisician makes,  
And often gives a Purge, but seldom takes:  
They not correct, but poyson all the Blood, 
And neer did any but the Doctors good.
Their Tribe, Trade, Trinkets, I defy them all,  
With evry work of Pothecarys Hall. 
These melancholy Matters I forbear; 
But let me tell Thee, Partlet mine, and swear,  
That when I view the Beauties of thy Face,
I fear not Death, nor Dangers, nor Disgrace:  
So may my Soul have Bliss, as when I spy  
The Scarlet Red about thy Partridge Eye,  
While thou art constant to thy own true Knight, 
While thou art mine, and I am thy delight,
All Sorrows at thy Presence take their flight.  
For true it is, as in Principio,  
Mulier est hominis confusio.  
Madam, the meaning of this Latin is,  
That Woman is to Man his Soveraign Bliss.
For when by Night I feel your tender Side,  
Though for the narrow Perch I cannot ride,  
Yet I have such a Solace in my Mind,  
That all my boding Cares are cast behind: 
And evn already I forget my Dream.
He said, and downward flew from off the Beam, 
For Day-light now began apace to spring,  
The Thrush to whistle, and the Lark to sing.  
Then crowing clapd his Wings, th appointed call,  
To chuck his Wives together in the Hall.
By this the Widow had unbarrd the Door,  
And Chanticleer went strutting out before,  
With Royal Courage, and with Heart so light,  
Asshewd he scornd the Visions of the Night. 
Now roaming in the Yard, he spurnd the Ground,
And gave to Partlet the first Grain he found. 
Then often featherd her with wanton Play,  
And trod her twenty times eer prime of Day 
And took by turns and gave so much delight, 
Her Sisters pind with Envy at the Sight.
He chuckd again, when other Corns he found,  
And scarcely deignd to set a Foot to Ground, 
But swaggerd like a Lord about his Hall, 
And his sevn Wives came running at his call. 
Twas now the Month in which the World began,
(If March beheld the first created Man:)  
And since the vernal Equinox, the Sun 
In Aries twelve Degrees, or more had run; 
When, casting up his Eyes against the Light,  
Both Month, and Day, and Hour, he measurd right;
And told more truly, than th Ephemeris,  
For Art may err, but Nature cannot miss.  
Thus numbring Times, and Seasons in his Breast,  
His second crowing the third Hour confessd.  
Then turning, said to Partlet, See, my Dear,
How lavish Nature has adornd the Year; 
How the pale Primrose, and blue Violet spring,  
And Birds essay their Throats disusd to sing:  
All these are ours; and I with pleasure see 
Man strutting on two Legs, and aping me!
An unfledgd Creature, of a lumpish frame,  
Indewd with fewer Particles of Flame:  
Our Dame sits couring oer the Kitchin-fire,  
I draw fresh Air, and Natures Works admire:  
And evn this Day, in more delight abound,
Than, since I was an Egg, I ever found. 
The time shall come when Chanticleer shall wish 
His Words unsaid, and hate his boasted Bliss: 
The crested Bird shall by Experience know,  
Jove made not him his Master-piece below;
And learn the latter end of Joy is Woe. 
The Vessel of his Bliss to Dregs is run,  
And Heavn will have him tast his other Tun.  
Ye Wise, draw near, and hearken to my Tale, 
Which proves that oft the Proud by Flattry fall;
The Legend is as true I undertake 
As Tristram is, and Launcelot of the Lake:  
Which all our Ladies in such revrence hold,  
As if in Book of Martyrs it were told.  
A Fox full fraught with seeming Sanctity,
That feard an Oath, but like the Devil, would lie, 
Who lookd like Lent, and had the holy Leer,  
And durst not sin before he sayd his Prayr: 
This pious Cheat, that never suckd the Blood,  
Nor chawd the Flesh of Lambs, but when he coud,
Had passd three Summers in the neighbring Wood; 
And musing long whom next to circumvent,  
On Chanticleer his wicked Fancy bent; 
And in his high imagination cast, 
By Stratagem to gratify his Tast.
The Plot contrivd, before the break of Day,  
Saint Reynard through the Hedge had made his way; 
The Pale was next, but proudly, with a bound  
He lept the Fence of the forbidden Ground:  
Yet fearing to be seen, within a Bed
Of Coleworts he conceald his wily Head;  
Then sculkd till Afternoon, and watchd his time,  
(As Murdrers use) to perpetrate his Crime. 
O Hypocrite, ingenious to destroy,  
O Traytor, worse than Sinon was to Troy;
O vile Subverter of the Gallick Reign,  
More false than Gano was to Charlemaign!  
O Chanticleer, in an unhappy Hour 
Didst thou forsake the Safety of thy Bowr:  
Better for Thee thou hadst believd thy Dream,
And not that Day descended from the Beam! 
But here the Doctors eagerly dispute: 
Some hold Predestination absolute:  
Some Clerks maintain, that Heavn at first foresees,  
And in the virtue of Foresight decrees.
If this be so, then Prescience binds the Will,  
And Mortals are not free to Good or Ill 
For what he first foresaw, he must ordain 
Or its eternal Prescience may be vain 
As bad for us as Prescience had not bin:
For first, or last, hes Author of the Sin. 
And who says that, let the blaspheming Man  
Say worse evn of the Devil, if he can. 
For how can that Eternal Powr be just  
To punish Man, who Sins because he must?
Or, how can He reward a vertuous Deed,  
Which is not done by us; but first decreed? 
I cannot boult this Matter to the Bran, 
As Bradwardin and holy Austin can:  
If Prescience can determine Actions so
That we must do, because he did foreknow  
Or that foreknowing, yet our Choice is free,  
Not forcd to Sin by strict necessity;  
This strict necessity they simple call, 
Another sort there is, conditional.
The first so binds the Will that Things foreknown 
By Spontaneity, not Choice, are done. 
Thus Galley-Slaves tug willing, at their Oar, 
Content to work, in prospect of the Shore;  
But woud not work at all, if not constraind before.
That other does not Liberty constrain,  
But Man may either act, or may refrain. 
Heavn made us Agents free to Good or Ill,  
And forcd it not, tho he foresaw the Will.  
Freedom was first bestowd on human Race,
And Prescience only held the second place.  
If he could make such Agents wholly free, 
I not dispute; the Points too high for me; 
For Heavns unfathomd Powr what Man can sound, 
Or put to his Omnipotence a Bound?
He made us to his Image all agree;  
That Image is the Soul, and that must be, 
Or not the Makers Image, or be free. 
But whether it were better Man had been 
By Nature bound to Good, not free to Sin,
I wave, for fear of splitting on a Rock.  
The Tale I tell is only of a Cock;  
Who had not run the hazard of his Life  
Had he believd his Dream, and not his Wife:  
For Women, with a mischief to their Kind,
Pervert, with bad Advice, our better Mind.  
A Womans Counsel brought us first to Woe,  
And made her Man his Paradice forego, 
Where at Hearts ease he livd, and might have bin  
As free from Sorrow as he was from Sin.
For what the Devil had their Sex to do, 
That, born to Folly, they presumd to know, 
And could not see the Serpent in the Grass? 
But I my self presume, and let it pass. 
Silence in times of Suffring is the best,
Tis dangrous to disturb a Hornets Nest.  
In other Authors you may find enough, 
But all they say of Dames is idle Stuff.  
Legends of lying Wits together bound, 
The Wife of Bath would throw em to the Ground:
These are the words of Chanticleer, not mine, 
I honour Dames, and think their Sex divine. 
Now to continue what my Tale begun. 
Lay Madam Partlet basking in the Sun, 
Breast-high in Sand: Her Sisters, in a row,
Enjoyed the Beams above, the Warmth below.  
The Cock, that of his Flesh was ever free,  
Sung merrier than the Mermaid in the Sea: 
And so befel, that as he cast his Eye 
Among the Colworts on a Butterfly,
He saw false Reynard where he lay full low, 
I need not swear he had no list to Crow:  
But cryd, Cock, Cock, and gave a suddain Start,  
As sore dismaid and frighted at his Heart.  
For Birds and Beasts, informd by Nature, know
Kinds opposite to theirs, and fly their Foe.  
So, Chanticleer, who never saw a Fox, 
Yet shund him as a Sailor shuns the Rocks. 
But the false Loon, who coud not work his Will 
By open Force, employed his flattring Skill:
I hope, my Lord, said he, I not offend, 
Are you afraid of me that am your Friend? 
I were a Beast indeed to do you wrong,  
I, who have lovd and honourd you so long: 
Stay, gentle Sir, nor take a false Alarm,
For, on my Soul, I never meant you harm.  
I come no Spy, nor as a Traytor press,  
To learn the Secrets of your soft Recess: 
Far be from Reynard so prophane a Thought,  
But by the Sweetness of your Voice was brought:
For, as I bid my Beads, by chance I heard 
The Song as of an Angel in the Yard:  
A Song that woud have charmd th infernal Gods, 
And banishd Horror from the dark Abodes: 
Had Orpheus sung it in the neather Sphere,
So much the Hymn had pleasd the Tyrants Ear,  
The Wife had been detaind, to keep the Husband there.  
My Lord, your Sire familiarly I knew, 
A Peer deserving such a Son, as you:  
He, with your Lady-Mother (whom Heavn rest)
Has often gracd my House, and been my Guest  
To view his living Features does me good, 
For I am your poor Neighbour in the Wood; 
And in my Cottage shoud be proud to see  
The worthy Heir of my Friends Family.
But since I speak of Singing let me say,  
As with an upright Heart I safely may,  
That, save your self, there breaths not on the Ground 
One like your Father for a Silver sound.  
So sweetly woud he wake the Winter-day,
That Matrons to the Church mistook their way, 
And thought they heard the merry Organ play.  
And he to raise his Voice with artful Care, 
(What will not Beaux attempt to please the Fair?) 
On Tiptoe stood to sing with greater Strength,
And stretchd his comely Neck at all the length:  
And while he paind his Voice to pierce the Skies, 
As Saints in Raptures use, would shut his Eyes, 
That the sound striving through the narrow Throat,  
His winking might avail, to mend the Note.
By this, in Song, he never had his Peer,  
From sweet Cecilia down to Chanticleer; 
Not Maros Muse, who sung the mighty Man, 
Nor Pindars heavnly Lyre, nor Horace when a Swan. 
Your Ancestors proceed from Race divine:
From Brennus and Belinus is your Line;  
Who gave to sovraign Rome such loud Alarms,  
That evn the Priests were not excusd from Arms. 
Besides, a famous Monk of modern times, 
Has left of Cocks recorded in his Rhimes,
That of a Parish-Priest the Son and Heir  
(When Sons of Priests were from the Proverb clear)  
Affronted once a Cock of noble Kind,  
And either lamd his Legs, or struck him blind; 
For which the Clerk his Father was disgracd,
And in his Benefice another placd. 
Now sing, my Lord, if not for love of me, 
Yet for the sake of sweet Saint Charity;  
Make Hills and Dales, and Earth and Heavn rejoice, 
And emulate your Fathers Angel-voice.
The Cock was pleasd to hear him speak so fair, 
And proud beside, as solar People are;  
Nor coud the Treason from the Truth descry,  
So was he ravishd with this Flattery:  
So much the more as from a little Elf,
He had a high Opinion of himself: 
Though sickly, slender, and not large of Limb,  
Concluding all the World was made for him.  
Ye Princes, raisd by Poets to the Gods,  
And Alexanderd up in lying Odes,
Believe not evry flattring Knaves report,  
Theres many a Reynard lurking in the Court;  
And he shall be receivd with more regard 
And listned to, than modest Truth is heard.  
This Chanticleer, of whom the Story sings,
Stood high upon his Toes, and clapd his Wings; 
Then stretchd his Neck, and winkd with both his Eyes, 
Ambitious, as he sought th Olympick Prize. 
But while he paind himself to raise his Note,  
False Reynard rushd, and caught him by the Throat.
Then on his Back he laid the precious Load, 
And sought his wonted shelter of the Wood;  
Swiftly he made his way, the Mischief done, 
Of all unheeded, and pursud by none. 
Alas, what stay is there in human State,
Or who can shun inevitable Fate?  
The Doom was written, the Decree was past,  
Eer the Foundations of the World were cast!  
In Aries though the Sun exalted stood,  
His Patron-Planet to procure his good;
Yet Saturn was his mortal Foe, and he 
In Libra raisd, opposd the same Degree: 
The Rays both good and bad, of equal Powr, 
Each thwarting other, made a mingled Hour.  
On Friday-morn he dreamt this direful Dream,
Cross to the worthy Native, in his Scheme!  
Ah blissful Venus, Goddess of Delight,  
How coudst thou suffer thy devoted Knight, 
On thy own Day, to fall by Foe oppressd, 
The wight of all the World who servd thee best?
Who true to Love, was all for Recreation, 
And minded not the Work of Propagation. 
Gaufride, who couldst so well in Rhime complain  
The Death of Richard with an Arrow slain, 
Why had not I thy Muse, or thou my Heart,
To sing this heavy Dirge with equal Art!  
That I like thee on Friday might complain;  
For on that Day was Ceur de Lion slain. 
Not louder Cries, when Ilium was in Flames, 
Were sent to Heavn by woful Trojan Dames,
When Pyrrhus tossd on high his burnishd Blade,  
And offerd Priam to his Fathers Shade,  
Than for the Cock the widowd Poultry made. 
Fair Partlet first, when he was born from sight,  
With soveraign Shrieks bewaild her Captive Knight:
Far lowder than the Carthaginian Wife,  
When Asdrubal her Husband lost his Life,  
When she beheld the smouldring Flames ascend, 
And all the Punick Glories at an end: 
Willing into the Fires she plungd her Head,
With greater Ease than others seek their Bed. 
Not more aghast the Matrons of Renown,  
When Tyrant Nero burnd th Imperial Town,  
Shriekd for the downfal in a doleful Cry,  
For which their guiltless Lords were doomd to die.
Now to my Story I return again: 
The trembling Widow, and her Daughters twain, 
This woful cackling Cry with Horror heard,  
Of those distracted Damsels in the Yard;  
And starting up, beheld the heavy Sight,
How Reynard to the Forest took his Flight,  
And cross his Back, as in triumphant Scorn, 
The Hope and Pillar of the House was born.  
The Fox, the wicked Fox, was all the Cry, 
Out from his House ran evry Neighbour nigh:
The Vicar first, and after him the Crew,  
With Forks and Staves the Fellon to pursue. 
Ran Coll our Dog, and Talbot with the Band, 
And Malkin, with her Distaff in her Hand: 
Ran Cow and Calf, and Family of Hogs,
In Panique Horror of pursuing Dogs; 
With many a deadly Grunt and doleful Squeak 
Poor Swine, as if their pretty Hearts would break.  
The Shouts of Men, the Women in dismay, 
With Shrieks augment the Terror of the Day.
The Ducks, that heard the Proclamation cryd, 
And feard a Persecution might betide,  
Full twenty Mile from Town their Voyage take, 
Obscure in Rushes of the liquid Lake. 
The Geese fly oer the Barn; the Bees in Arms,
Drive headlong from their Waxen Cells in Swarms.  
Jack Straw at London-stone with all his Rout  
Struck not the City with so loud a Shout; 
Not when with English Hate they did pursue  
A French Man, or an unbelieving Jew:
Not when the Welkin rung with one and all;  
And Echoes bounded back from Foxs Hall;  
Earth seemd to sink beneath, and Heavn above to fall. 
With Might and Main they chasd the murdrous Fox,  
With brazen Trumpets, and inflated Box,
To Kindle Mars with military Sounds,  
Nor wanted Horns t inspire sagacious Hounds. 
But see how Fortune can confound the Wise,  
And when they least expect it, turn the Dice. 
The Captive Cock, who scarce coud draw his Breath,
And lay within the very Jaws of Death,  
Yet in this Agony his Fancy wrought,  
And Fear supplyd him with this happy Thought:  
Yours is the Prize, victorious Prince, said he, 
The Vicar my defeat, and all the Village see,
Enjoy your friendly Fortune while you may,  
And bid the Churls that envy you the Prey,  
Call back their mungril Curs, and cease their Cry,  
See, Fools, the shelter of the Wood is nigh,  
And Chanticleer in your despight shall die.
He shall be pluckd and eaten to the Bone.  
Tis well advisd, in Faith it shall be done; 
This Reynard said: but as the Word he spoke,  
The Prisner with a Spring from Prison broke: 
Then stretchd his featherd Fans with all his might,
And to the neighbring Maple wingd his flight. 
Whom when the Traytor safe on Tree beheld,  
He cursd the Gods, with Shame and Sorrow filld; 
Shame for his Folly; Sorrow out of time,  
For Plotting an unprofitable Crime:
Yet mastring both, th Artificer of Lies 
Renews th Assault, and his last Battry tries. 
Though I, said he, did neer in Thought offend, 
How justly may my Lord suspect his Friend!  
Th appearance is against me, I confess,
Who seemingly have put you in Distress: 
You, if your Goodness does not plead my Cause,  
May think I broke all hospitable Laws,  
To bear you from your Palace-yard by Might, 
And put your noble Person in a Fright:
This, since you take it ill, I must repent, 
Though Heavn can witness with no bad intent  
I practisd it, to make you taste your Cheer, 
With double Pleasure, first prepared by fear. 
So loyal Subjects often seize their Prince,
Forcd (for his Good) to seeming Violence,  
Yet mean his sacred Person not the least Offence. 
Descend; so help me Jove as you shall find  
That Reynard comes of no dissembling Kind.  
Nay, quoth the Cock; but I beshrew us both,
If I believe a Saint upon his Oath: 
An honest Man may take a Knaves Advice,  
But Idiots only will be couzend twice:  
Once warnd is well beward: No flattering lies  
Shall sooth me more to sing with winking Eyes,
And open Mouth, for fear of catching Flies. 
Who Blindfold walks upon a Rivers brim, 
When he should see, has he deservd to swim?  
Better, Sir Cock, let all Contention cease, 
Come down, said Reynard, let us treat of Peace.
A Peace with all my Soul, said Chanticleer; 
But, with your Favour, I will treat it here:  
And least the Truce with Treason should be mixt,  
Tis my concern to have the Tree betwixt. 

In this plain Fable you th Effect may see
Of Negligence, and fond Credulity:  
And learn besides of Flattrers to beware,  
Then most pernicious when they speak too fair.  
The Cock and Fox, the Fool and Knave imply; 
The Truth is moral, though the Tale a Lie.
Who spoke in Parables, I dare not say;  
But sure, he knew it was a pleasing way,  
Sound Sense, by plain Example, to convey. 
And in a Heathen Author we may find,  
That Pleasure with Instruction should be joind:
So take the Corn, and leave the Chaff behind.

**
The Flower and the Leaf; or, the Lady in the Arbor
***

NOW turning from the wintry Signs, the Sun  
His Course exalted through the Ram had run: 
And whirling up the Skies, his Chariot drove  
Through Taurus, and the lightsome Realms of Love, 
Where Venus from her Orb descends in Showrs
To glad the Ground, and paint the Fields with Flowrs:  
When first the tender Blades of Grass appear, 
And Buds that yet the blast of Eurus fear,  
Stand at the door of Life; and doubt to cloath the Year;  
Till gentle Heat, and soft repeated Rains
Make the green Blood to dance within their Veins: 
Then, at their Call, emboldend out they come,  
And swell the Gems, and burst the narrow Room;  
Broader and broader yet, their Blooms display,  
Salute the welcome Sun, and entertain the Day.
Then from their breathing Souls the Sweets repair 
To scent the Skies, and purge th unwholesome Air:  
Joy spreads the Heart, and with a general Song, 
Spring issues out, and leads the jolly Months along.  
In that sweet Season, as in Bed I lay,
And sought in Sleep to pass the Night away, 
I turned my weary Side, but still in vain,  
Tho full of youthful Health, and void of Pain: 
Cares I had none to keep me from my Rest, 
For Love had never enterd in my Breast;
I wanted nothing Fortune could supply,  
Nor did she Slumber till that hour deny:  
I wonderd then, but after found it true, 
Much Joy had dryd away the balmy Dew:  
Seas woud be Pools without the brushing Air,
To curl the Waves; and sure some little Care  
Shoud weary Nature so, to make her want repair.  
When Chaunticleer the second Watch had sung,  
Scorning the Scorner Sleep from Bed I sprung. 
And dressing, by the Moon, in loose Array
Passd out in open Air, preventing Day, 
And sought a goodly Grove, as Fancy led my way. 
Strait as a Line in beauteous Order stood 
Of Oaks unshorn a venerable Wood; 
Fresh was the Grass beneath, and evry Tree,
At distance planted in a due degree,  
Their branching Arms in Air with equal space  
Stretchd to their Neighbours with a long Embrace:  
And the new Leaves on evry Bough were seen,  
Some ruddy-colourd, some of lighter green.
The painted Birds, Companions of the Spring,  
Hopping from Spray to Spray, were heard to sing;  
Both Eyes and Ears receivd a like Delight, 
Enchanting Musick, and a charming Sight.  
On Philomel I fixd my whole Desire;
And listnd for the Queen of all the Quire;  
Fain would I hear her heavnly Voice to sing: 
And wanted yet an Omen to the Spring. 
Attending long in vain; I took the way  
Which through a Path, but scarcely printed, lay;
In narrow Mazes oft it seemed to meet,  
And lookd as lightly pressd by Fairy Feet.  
Wandring I walkd alone, for still methought  
To some strange End so strange a Path was wrought:  
At last it led me where an Arbour stood,
The sacred Receptacle of the Wood:  
This Place unmarkd though oft I walkd the Green,  
In all my Progress I had never seen:  
And seizd at once with Wonder and Delight, 
Gazd all arround me, new to the transporting Sight.
Twas benchd with Turf, and, goodly to be seen,  
The thick young Grass arose in fresher Green: 
The Mound was newly made, no Sight coud pass 
Betwixt the nice Partitions of the Grass; 
The well-united Sods so closely lay;
And all arround the Shades defended it from Day.  
For Sycamours with Eglantine were spread, 
A Hedge about the Sides, a Covering over Head.  
And so the fragrant Brier was wove between, 
The Sycamour and Flowrs were mixd with Green,
That Nature seemd to vary the Delight; 
And satisfyd at once the Smell and Sight.  
The Master Work-man of the Bowr was known  
Through Fairy-Lands, and built for Oberon;  
Who twining Leaves with such Proportion drew,
They rose by Measure, and by Rule they grew;  
No Mortal Tongue can half the Beauty tell,  
For none but Hands divine could work so well. 
Both Roof and Sides were like a Parlour made, 
A soft Recess, and a cool Summer Shade;
The Hedge was set so thick, no Foreign Eye  
The Persons placd within it could espy;  
But all that passd without with Ease was seen, 
As if nor Fence nor Tree was placd between.  
Twas borderd with a Field; and some was plain
With Grass; and some was sowd with rising Grain. 
That (now the Dew with Spangles deckd the Ground,) 
A sweeter spot of Earth was never found.  
I lookd, and lookd, and still with new Delight; 
Such Joy my Soul, such Pleasures filld my Sight:
And the fresh Eglantine exhald a Breath; 
Whose Odours were of Powr to raise from Death. 
Nor sullen Discontent nor anxious Care, 
Evn tho brought thither, could inhabit there: 
But thence they fled as from their mortal Foe;
For this sweet Place coud only Pleasure know.  
Thus as I musd, I cast aside my Eye, 
And saw a Medlar-Tree was planted nigh. 
The spreading Branches made a goodly Show,  
And full of opening Blooms was evry Bough:
A Goldfinch there I saw with gawdy Pride  
Of painted Plumes, that hoppd from side to side, 
Still pecking as she passd; and still she drew 
The Sweets from evry Flower, and suckd the Dew: 
Sufficd at length, she warbled in her Throat,
And tund her Voice to many a merry Note, 
But indistinct, and neither Sweet nor Clear,  
Yet such as soothd my Soul, and pleasd my Ear.  
Her short Performance was no sooner tryd,  
When she I sought, the Nightingale replyd:
So Sweet, so shrill, so variously she sung, 
That the grove ecchod, and the Valleys rung: 
And I so ravishd with her heavnly Note  
I stood intrancd, and had no room for Thought, 
But all oer-powrd with Extasy of Bliss,
Was in a pleasing Dream of Paradice;  
At length I wakd; and looking round the Bowr  
Searchd every Tree, and pryd on evry Flowr, 
If anywhere by chance I might espy  
The rural Poet of the Melody:
For still methought she sung not far away;  
At last I found her on a Lawrel Spray,  
Close by my Side she sate, and fair in Sight, 
Full in a Line, against her opposite; 
Where stood with Eglantine the Lawrel twind:
And both their native Sweets were well conjoind. 
On the green Bank I sat, and listend long; 
(Sitting was more convenient for the Song!) 
Nor till her Lay was ended could I move,  
But wishd to dwell for ever in the Grove.
Only methought the time too swiftly passd, 
And evry Note I feard would be the last.  
My Sight, and Smell, and Hearing were employd, 
And all three Senses in full Gust enjoyd.  
And what alone did all the rest surpass,
The sweet Possession of the Fairy Place;  
Single, and conscious to my Self alone  
Of Pleasures to th excluded World unknown. 
Pleasures which nowhere else, were to be found, 
And all Elysium in a spot of Ground.
Thus while I sat intent to see and hear,  
And drew Perfumes of more than vital Air, 
All suddenly I heard th approaching sound  
Of vocal Musick, on th enchanted Ground: 
An Host of Saints it seemd, so full the Quire;
As if the Blessd above did all conspire, 
To join their Voices, and neglect the Lyre. 
At length there issud from the Grove behind  
A fair Assembly of the Female Kind: 
A Train less fair, as ancient Fathers tell,
Seducd the Sons of Heaven to rebel.  
I pass their Forms, and evry charming Grace, 
Less than an Angel would their Worth debase:  
But their Attire like Liveries of a kind, 
All rich and rare is fresh within my Mind.
In Velvet white as Snow the Troop was gownd, 
The Seams with sparkling Emeralds set around; 
Their Hoods and Sleeves the same: And purfled oer  
With Diamonds, Pearls, and all the shining store  
Of Eastern Pomp: Their long descending Train
With Rubies edgd, and Saphires, swept the Plain: 
High on their Heads, with Jewels richly set 
Each Lady wore a radiant Coronet. 
Beneath the Circles, al the Quire was gracd  
With Chaplets green on their fair Foreheads placd,
Of Lawrel some, of Woodbine many more;  
And Wreaths of Agnus castus others bore:  
These last, who with those Virgin Crowns were dressd,  
Appeard in higher Honour than the rest.  
They dancd around, but in the midst was seen
A Lady of a more majestique Mien; 
By Stature, and by Beauty markd their Sovereign Queen. 
She in the midst began with sober Grace;  
Her Servants Eyes were fixd upon her Face, 
And as she movd or turnd, her Motions viewd,
Her Measures kept, and Step by Step pursud.  
Methought she trod the Ground with greater Grace, 
With more of Godhead shining in her Face; 
And as in Beauty she surpassd the Quire, 
So, nobler than the rest, was her Attire.
A crown of ruddy Gold inclosd her Brow,  
Plain without Pomp, and Rich without a Show:  
A Branch of Agnus Castus in her Hand  
She bore aloft (her Scepter of Command;)  
Admird, adord by all the circling Crowd,
For wheresoeer she turnd her Face, they bowd:  
And as she dancd, a Roundelay she sung,  
In honour of the Lawrel, ever young:  
She raisd her Voice on high, and sung so clear,  
The Fawns came scudding from the Groves to hear:
And all the bending Forest lent an Ear. 
At evry Close she made, th attending Throng 
Replyd, and bore the Burden of the Song: 
So just, so small, yet in so sweet a Note,  
It seemd the Musick melted in the Throat.
Thus dancing on, and singing as they dancd,  
They to the middle of the Mead advancd:  
Till round my Arbour, a new Ring they made, 
And footed it about the secret Shade: 
Oerjoyd to see the jolly Troop so near,
But somewhat awd I shook with holy Fear; 
Yet not so much, but that I noted well  
Who did the most in Song, or Dance excel. 
Not long I had observd, when from afar 
I heard a suddain Symphony of War;
The neighing Coursers, and the Soldiers cry,  
And sounding Trumps that seemd to tear the Sky.  
I saw soon after this, behind the Grove 
From whence the Ladies did in order move, 
Come issuing out in Arms a Warrior-Train,
That like a Deluge pourd upon the Plain: 
On barbed Steeds they rode in proud Array,  
Thick as the College of the Bees in May,  
When swarming oer the dusky Fields they fly, 
New to the Flowrs, and intercept the Sky.
So fierce they drove, their Coursers were so fleet, 
That the Turf trembled underneath their Feet. 
To tell their costly Furniture were long, 
The Summers Day woud end before the Song:  
To purchase but the Tenth of all their Store
Would make the mighty Persian Monarch poor. 
Yet what I can, I will; before the rest 
The Trumpets issud in white Mantles dressd: 
A numerous Troop, and all their Heads around  
With Chaplets green of Cerrial-Oak were crownd,
And at each Trumpet was a Banner bound; 
Which waving in the Wind displayd at large 
Their Masters Coat of Arms, and Knightly Charge. 
Broad were the Banners, and of snowy Hue, 
A purer Web the Silk-worm never drew.
The chief about their Necks the Scutcheons wore,  
With Orient Pearls and Jewels pouderd oer:  
Broad were their Collars too, and evry one 
Was set about with many a costly Stone. 
Next these of Kings at Arms a goodly Train,
In proud Array came prancing oer the Plain:  
Their Cloaks were Cloth of Silver mixd with Gold,  
And Garlands green arround their Temples rolld:  
Rich Crowns were on their royal Scutcheons placd,  
With Saphires, Diamonds, and with Rubies gracd:
And as the Trumpets their appearance made,  
So these in Habits were alike arrayd;  
But with a Pace more sober, and more slow:  
And twenty, Rank in Rank, they rode a-row.  
The Pursevants came next, in number more:
And like the Heralds each his Scutcheon bore: 
Clad in white Velvet all their Troop they led,  
With each an Oaken Chaplet on his Head. 
Nine royal Knights in equal Rank succeed, 
Each Warrior mounted on a fiery Steed:
In golden Armour glorious to behold;  
The Rivets of their Arms were naild with Gold. 
Their Surcoats of white Ermin-Fur were made;  
With Cloth of Gold between that cast a glittring Shade.  
The Trappings of their Steeds were of the same;
The golden Fringe evn set the Ground on flame, 
And drew a precious Trail: A Crown divine 
Of Lawrel did about their Temples twine.  
Three Henchmen were for evry Knight assignd,  
All in rich Livery clad, and of a kind:
White Velvet, but unshorn, for Cloaks they wore,  
And each within his Hand a Truncheon bore:  
The foremost held a Helm of rare device;  
A Princes Ransom woud not pay the Price.  
The second bore the Buckler of his Knight,
The third of Cornel-Wood a Spear upright, 
Headed with piercing Steel, and polishd bright.  
Like to their Lords their Equipage was seen,  
And all their Foreheads crownd with Garlands green.  
And after these came armd with Spear and Shield
An Host so great as coverd all the Field:  
And all their Foreheads, like the Knights before, 
With Lawrels ever green were shaded oer, 
Or Oak, or other Leaves of lasting kind,  
Tenacious of the Stem and firm against the Wind.
Some in their Hands, besides the Lance and Shield,  
The Boughs of Woodbind or of Hauthorn held, 
Or Branches for their mistique Emblems took,  
Of Palm, of Lawrel, or of Cerrial Oak.  
Thus marching to the Trumpets lofty Sound,
Drawn in two Lines adverse they wheeld around, 
And in the middle Meadow took their Ground. 
Among themselves the Turney they divide 
In equal Squadrons rangd on either side. 
Then turnd their Horses Heads, and Man to Man,
And Steed to Steed opposd, the Justs began.  
They lightly set their Lances in the rest,  
And, at the Sign, against each other pressd  
They met, I sitting at my Ease beheld 
The mixd Events, and Fortunes of the Field.
Some broke their Spears, some tumbled Horse and Man,  
And round the Fields the lightend Coursers ran.  
An Hour and more like Tides, in equal sway  
They rushd, and won by turns, and lost the Day:  
At length the Nine (who still together held)
Their fainting Foes to shameful Flight compelld,  
And with resistless Force, oer-ran the Field.  
Thus, to their Fame, when finishd was the Fight, 
The Victors from their lofty Steeds alight: 
Like them dismounted all the Warlike Train,
And two by two proceeded oer the Plain:  
Till to the fair Assembly they advancd,  
Who near the secret Arbour sung and dancd. 
The Ladies left their Measures at the Sight,  
To meet the Chiefs returning from the Fight,
And each with open Arms embracd her chosen Knight. 
Amid the Plain a spreading Lawrel stood,  
The Grace and Ornament of all the Wood: 
That pleasing Shade they sought, a soft Retreat 
From suddain April Showrs, a Shelter from the Heat.
Her leavy Arms with such extent were spread,  
So near the Clouds was her aspiring Head, 
That Hosts of Birds that wing the liquid Air, 
Perchd in the Boughs, had nightly Lodging there. 
And Flocks of Sheep beneath the Shade from far
Might hear the ratling Hail, and wintry War;  
From Heavns Inclemency here found retreat, 
Enjoyd the cool, and shund the scorching Heat:  
A hundred Knights might there at Ease abide;  
And evry Knight a Lady by his side:
The Trunk it self such Odours did bequeath  
That a Moluccan Breeze to these was common Breath.  
The Lords, and Ladies here approaching, paid  
Their Homage, with a low Obeisance made:  
And seemd to venerate the sacred Shade.
These Rites performd, their Pleasures they pursue, 
With Songs of Love, and mix with Measures new; 
Around the holy Tree their Dance they frame,  
And evry Champion leads his chosen Dame. 
I cast my Sight upon the farther Field,
And a fresh Object of Delight beheld: 
For from the Region of the West I heard 
New Musick sound, and a new Troop appeard; 
Of Knights, and Ladies mixd a jolly Band,  
But all on Foot they marchd, and Hand in Hand.
The Ladies dressd in rich Symarrs were seen  
Of Florence Satten, flowerd with White and Green,  
And for a Shade betwixt the bloomy Gridelin.  
The Borders of their Petticoats below 
Were guarded thick with Rubies on a-row;
And evry Damsel wore upon her Head 
Of Flowrs a Garland blended White and Red. 
Attird in Mantles all the Knights were seen  
That gratifyd the View with chearful Green:  
Their Chaplets of their Ladies Colours were
Composd of White and Red, to shade their shining Hair. 
Before the merry Troop the Minstrels playd,  
All in their Masters Liveries were arrayd,  
And clad in Green, and on their Temples wore  
The Chaplets White and Red their Ladies bore.
Their Instruments were various in their kind, 
Some for the Bow, and some for breathing Wind:  
The Sawtry, Pipe, and Hautbois noisy band,  
And the soft Lute trembling beneath the touching Hand.  
A Tuft of Dasies on a flowry Lay
They saw, and thitherward they bent their way:  
To this both Knights and Dames their Homage made, 
And due Obeisance to the Daisy paid.  
And then the Band of Flutes began to play,  
To which a Lady sung a Virelay;
And still at evry close she woud repeat 
The Burden of the Song, The Daisy is so sweet.  
The Daisy is so sweet when she begun, 
The Troop of Knights and Dames continud on.  
The Concert and the Voice so charmd my Ear,
And soothd my Soul, that it was Heavn to hear.  
But soon their Pleasure passd: At Noon of Day  
The Sun with sultry Beams began to play:  
Not Syrius shoots a fiercer Flame from high,  
When with his poisnous Breath he blasts the Sky:
Then droopd the fading Flowrs (their Beauty fled) 
And closd their sickly Eyes, and hung the Head;  
And, rivelld up with Heat, lay dying in their Bed. 
The Ladies gaspd, and scarcely could respire;  
The Breath they drew, no longer Air, but Fire;
The fainty Knights were scorchd; and knew not where  
To run for Shelter, for no Shade was near.  
And after this the gathring Clouds amain 
Pourd down a Storm of rattling Hail and Rain;  
And lightning flashed betwixt: The Field, and Flowrs,
Burnt up before, were buryd in the Showrs.  
The Ladies, and the Knights no Shelter nigh,  
Bare to the Weather, and the wintry Sky,  
Were dropping wet, disconsolate, and wan, 
And through their thin Array receivd the Rain.
While those in White, protected by the Tree,  
Saw pass the vain Assault, and stood from Danger free.  
But as Compassion movd their gentle Minds, 
When ceasd the Storm, and silent were the Winds, 
Displeasd at what, not suffring they had seen,
They went to chear the Faction of the Green.  
The Queen in white Array before her Band, 
Saluting, took her Rival by the Hand; 
So did the Knights and Dames, with courtly grace  
And with Behaviour sweet their Foes embrace.
Then thus the Queen with Lawrel on her Brow:  
Fair Sister, I have sufferd in your Woe: 
Nor shall be wanting ought within my Powr  
For your Relief in my refreshing Bowr. 
That other answerd with a lowly Look,
And soon the gracious Invitation took 
For ill at ease both she and all her Train  
The scorching Sun had born, and beating Rain. 
Like Courtesy was usd by all in White, 
Each Dame a Dame receivd, and evry Knight a Knight.
The Lawrel-Champions with their Swords invade 
The neighbring Forests where the Justs were made,  
And Serewood from the rotten Hedges took, 
And Seeds of Latent-Fire from Flints provoke: 
A chearful Blaze arose, and by the Fire
They warmd their frozen Feet, and dryd their wet Attire.  
Refreshd with Heat the Ladies sought around  
For virtuous Herbs which gathered from the ground 
They squeezd the Juice; and cooling Ointment made, 
Which on their Sun-burnt Cheeks, and their chapt Skins they laid:
Then sought green Salads, which they bad em eat, 
A Soveraign Remedy for inward Heat. 
The Lady of the Leaf ordaind a Feast,  
And made the Lady of the Flowr her Guest:  
When lo, a Bowr ascended on the Plain,
With suddain Seats adornd, and large for either Train. 
This Bowr was near my pleasant Arbour placd,  
That I could hear and see whatever passd 
The Ladies sat, with each a Knight between, 
Distinguishd by their Colours White and Green;
The vanquishd Party with the Victors joind, 
Nor wanted sweet Discourse, the Banquet of the Mind.  
Mean time the Minstrels playd on either side 
Vain of their Art, and for the Mastry vyd 
The sweet Contention lasted for an Hour,
And reachd my secret Arbour from the Bowr.  
The Sun was set; and Vesper to supply 
His absent Beams, had lighted up the Sky; 
When Philomel, officious all the Day  
To sing the Service of th ensuing May,
Fled from her Lawrel Shade, and wingd her Flight 
Directly to the Queen arrayd in White: 
And hopping sate familiar on her Hand,  
A new Musitian, and increasd the Band. 
The Goldfinch, who to shun the scalding Heat,
Had changd the Medlar for a safer Seat,  
And hid in Bushes scapd the bitter Showr, 
Now perchd upon the Lady of the Flowr;  
And either Songster holding out their Throats,  
And folding up their Wings renewd their Notes:
As if all Day, preluding to the Fight,  
They only had rehearsd, to sing by Night.  
The Banquet ended, and the Battle done, 
They dancd by Star-light and the friendly Moon:  
And when they were to part, the Laureat Queen
Supplyd with Steeds the Lady of the Green, 
Her, and her Train conducting on the way  
The Moon to follow, and avoid the Day.  
This when I saw, inquisitive to know  
The secret Moral of the Mystique Show,
I started from my Shade, in hopes to find 
Some Nymph to satisfy my longing Mind:  
And as my fair Adventure fell, I found  
A Lady all in White, with Lawrel crownd, 
Who closd the Rear and softly pacd along,
Repeating to her self the former Song.  
With due respect my Body I inclind,  
As to some Being of Superiour Kind, 
And made my Court, according to the Day,  
Wishing her Queen and Her a happy May.
Great Thanks my Daughter, with a gracious Bow 
She said; and I who much desird to know  
Of whence she was, yet fearful how to break 
My Mind, adventurd humbly thus to speak  
Madam, Might I presume and not offend,
So may the Stars and shining Moon attend  
Your Nightly Sports, as you vouchsafe to tell,  
What Nymphs they were who mortal Forms excel, 
And what the Knights who fought in listed Fields so well. 
To this the Dame replyd: Fair daughter know,
That what you saw, was all a Fairy Show:  
And all those airy Shapes you now behold  
Were humane Bodies once, and cloathd with earthly Mold.  
Our Souls, not yet prepard for upper Light,  
Till Doomsday wander in the Shades of Night;
This only Holiday of all the Year,  
We priviledgd in Sun-shine may appear: 
With Songs and Dance we celebrate the Day,  
And with due Honours usher in the May.  
At other Times we reign by Night alone,
And posting through the Skies pursue the Moon:  
But when the Morn arises, none are found; 
For cruel Demogorgon walks the round, 
And if he finds a Fairy lag in Light, 
He drives the Wretch before; and lashes into Night.
All Courteous are by Kind; and ever proud 
With friendly Offices to help the Good. 
In every Land we have a larger Space  
Than what is known to you of mortal Race; 
Where we with Green adorn our Fairy Bowrs,
And even this Grove unseen before, is ours. 
Know farther; Evry Lady cloathd in White, 
And crownd with Oak and Lawrel evry Knight, 
Are Servants to the Leaf, by Liveries known 
Of Innocence; and I myself am one.
Saw you not Her so graceful to behold,  
In white Attire, and crownd with Radiant Gold? 
The Soveraign Lady of our Land is She,  
Diana calld, the Queen of Chastity:  
And, for the spotless Name of Maid she bears,
That Agnus castus in her Hand appears;  
And all her Train with leavy Chaplets crownd 
Were for unblamd Virginity renownd  
But those the chief and highest in Command  
Who bear those holy Branches in their Hand:
The Knights adorned with Lawrel-Crowns, are they, 
Whom Death nor Danger ever coud dismay,  
Victorious Names, who made the World obey:  
Who while they livd, in Deeds of Arms excelld 
And after Death for Deities were held.
But those who wear the Woodbine on their Brow 
Were Knights of Love, who never broke their Vow:  
Firm to their plighted Faith, and ever free 
From Fears and fickle Chance, and Jealousy. 
The Lords and Ladies, who the Woodbine bear,
As true as Tristram and Isotta were.  
But what are those said I, th unconquered Nine,  
Who crownd with Lawrel-Wreaths, in golden Armour shine?  
And who the Knights in Green, and what the Train  
Of Ladies dressd with Daisies on the Plain?
Why both the Bands in Worship disagree, 
And some adore the Flowr, and some the Tree? 
Just is your Suit, fair daughter, said the Dame,  
Those lawrelld Chiefs were Men of mighty Fame; 
Nine Worthies were they calld of diffrent Rites,
Three Jews, three Pagans, and three Christian Knights.  
These, as you see, ride foremost in the Field,  
As they the foremost Rank of Honour held, 
And all in Deeds of Chivalry excelld.  
Their Temples wreathd with Leafs, that still renew;
For deathless Lawrel is the Victors due. 
Who bear the Bows were Knights in Arthurs Reign, 
Twelve they, and twelve the Peers of Charlemain:  
For Bows the Strength of brawny Arms imply  
Emblems of Valour, and of Victory.
Behold an Order yet of newer Date 
Doubling their Number, equal in their State;  
Our Englands Ornament, the Crowns Defence,  
In Battle brave, Protectors of their Prince 
Unchangd by Fortune, to their Soveraign true,
For which their manly Legs are bound with Blue. 
These, of the Garter calld, of Faith unstaind,  
In fighting Fields the Lawrel have obtaind,  
And well repaid those Honours which they gaind.  
The Lawrel-Wreaths were first by Csar worn,
And still they Csars Successors adorn:  
One Leaf of this is Immortality,  
And more of Worth, than all the World can buy.  
One Doubt remains, said I, the Dames in Green,  
What were their Qualities, and who their Queen?
Flora commands, said she, those Nymphs and Knights, 
Who livd in slothful Ease, and loose Delights: 
Who never Acts of Honour durst pursue,  
The Men inglorious Knights, the Ladies all untrue:  
Who nursd in Idleness, and traind in Courts,
Passd all their precious Hours in Plays, and Sports, 
Till Death behind came stalking on, unseen, 
And witherd (like the Storm) the freshness of their Green. 
These, and their Mates, enjoy the present Hour,  
And therefore pay their Homage to the Flowr.
But Knights in Knightly Deeds should persevere, 
And still continue what at first they were; 
Continue, and proceed in Honours fair Career.  
No room for Cowardise, or dull Delay; 
From Good to Better they should urge their way.
For this with golden Spurs the Chiefs are gracd, 
With pointed Rowels armd to mend their haste;  
For this with lasting Leaves their Brows are bound, 
For Lawrel is the Sign of Labour crownd; 
Which bears the bitter Blast, nor shaken falls to Ground:
From Winter-Winds it suffers no decay,  
For ever fresh and fair, and evry Month is May.  
Evn when the vital Sap retreats below, 
Evn when the hoary Head is hid in Snow;  
The Life is in the Leaf, and still between
The Fits of falling Snows, appears the streaky Green.  
Not so the Flowr which lasts for little space, 
A short-livd Good, and an uncertain Grace; 
This way and that the feeble Stem is drivn,  
Weak to sustain the Storms, and Injuries of Heavn.
Propd by the Spring, it lifts aloft the Head,  
But of a sickly Beauty, soon to shed; 
In Summer living, and in Winter dead. 
For Things of tender Kind for Pleasure made 
Shoot up with swift Increase, and suddain are decayd.
With humble Words, the wisest I could frame,  
And proferd Service I repaid the Dame: 
That of her Grace she gave her Maid to know 
The secret meaning of this moral Show.  
And she to prove what Profit I had made
Of mystique Truth, in Fables first conveyd,  
Demanded, till the next returning May,  
Whether the Leaf or Flowr I would obey?  
I chose the Leaf; she smild with sober Chear,  
And wishd me fair Adventure for the Year,
And gave me Charms and Sigils, for defence  
Against ill Tongues that scandal Innocence: 
But I, said she, my Fellows must pursue,  
Already past the Plain, and out of view.  
We parted thus; I homeward sped my way,
Bewilderd in the Wood till Dawn of Day:  
And met the merry Crew who dancd about the May.  
Then late refreshd with Sleep I rose to write  
The visionary Vigils of the Night.  
Blush, as thou mayst, my little Book for Shame,
Nor hope with homely Verse to purchase Fame;  
For such thy Maker chose; and so designd 
Thy simple Style to suit thy lowly Kind.

**
The Wife of Bath her Tale
***

In Days of Old, when Arthur filld the Throne,  
Whose Acts and Fame to Foreign Lands were blown,  
The King of Elfs and little fairy Queen 
Gambolld on Heaths, and dancd on evry Green; 
And where the jolly Troop had led the Round,
The Grass unbidden rose, and markd the Ground. 
Nor darkling did they dance, the Silver Light 
Of Phbe servd to guide their Steps aright,  
And, with their Tripping pleasd, prolongd the Night.  
Her Beams they followd, where at full she plaid,
Nor longer than she shed her Horns they staid,  
From thence with airy Flight to Foreign Lands conveyd. 
Above the rest our Britain held they dear,  
More solemnly they kept their Sabbaths here,  
And made more spacious Rings, and revelld half the Year.
I speak of ancient Times; for now the Swain 
Returning late may pass the Woods in vain,  
And never hope to see the nightly Train:  
In vain the Dairy now with Mints is dressd,  
The Dairy-Maid expects no Fairy Guest,
To skim the Bowls and after pay the Feast.  
She sighs, and shakes her empty Shoes in vain,  
No Silver Penny to reward her Pain: 
For Priests with Prayrs, and other godly Geer, 
Have made the merry Goblins disappear;
And where they plaid their merry Pranks before, 
Have sprinkled Holy Water on the Floor: 
And Fryrs that through the wealthy Regions run 
Thick as the Motes, that twinkle in the Sun,  
Resort to Farmers rich, and bless their Halls
And exorcise the Beds, and cross the Walls: 
This makes the Fairy Quires forsake the Place,  
When once tis hallowd with the Rites of Grace:  
But in the Walks, where wicked Elves have been, 
The Learning of the Parish now is seen,
The Midnight Parson posting oer the Green  
With Gown tuckd up to Wakes; for Sunday next 
With humming Ale encouraging his Text;  
Nor wants the holy Leer to Country-Girl betwixt.  
From Fiends and Imps he sets the Village free,
There haunts not any Incubus, but He. 
The Maids and Women need no Danger fear 
To walk by Night, and Sanctity so near: 
For by some Haycock or some shady Thorn 
He bids his Beads both Even-song and Morn.
It so befel in this King Arthurs Reign,  
A lusty Knight was pricking oer the Plain; 
A Bachelor he was, and of the courtly Train.  
It happend as he rode, a Damsel gay  
In Russet-Robes to Market took her way;
Soon on the Girl he cast an amorous Eye,  
So strait she walkd, and on her Pasterns high: 
If seeing her behind he likd her Pace, 
Now turning short he better likd her Face. 
He lights in hast, and, full of Youthful Fire,
By Force accomplishd his obscene Desire  
This done away he rode, not unespyd, 
For swarming at his Back the Country cryd; 
And once in view they never lost the Sight, 
But seizd, and piniond brought to Court the Knight.
Then Courts of Kings were held in high Renown,  
Eer made the common Brothels of the Town;  
There, Virgins honourable Vows receivd,  
But chast as Maids in Monasteries livd:  
The King himself to Nuptial Ties a Slave,
No bad Example to his Poets gave; 
And they not bad, but in a vicious Age  
Had not to please the Prince debauchd the Stage. 
Now what shoud Arthur do? He lovd the Knight, 
But Soveraign Monarchs are the Source of Right:
Movd by the Damsels Tears and common Cry,  
He doomd the brutal Ravisher to die. 
But fair Geneura rose in his Defence, 
And prayd so hard for Mercy from the Prince; 
That to his Queen the King th Offender gave,
And left it in her Powr to Kill or Save: 
This gracious Act the Ladies all approve, 
Who thought it much a Man shoud die for Love;  
And with their Mistress joind in close Debate, 
(Covering their Kindness with dissembled Hate;)
If not to free him, to prolong his Fate.  
At last agreed, they calld him by consent  
Before the Queen and Female Parliament. 
And the fair Speaker, rising from her Chair 
Did thus the Judgment of the House declare.
Sir Knight, tho I have askd thy Life, yet still 
Thy Destiny depends upon my Will: 
Nor hast thou other Surety than the Grace 
Not due to thee from our offended Race. 
But as our Kind is of a softer Mold,
And cannot Blood without a Sigh behold, 
I grant thee Life; reserving still the Powr  
To take the Forfeit when I see my Hour; 
Unless thy Answer to my next Demand 
Shall set Thee free from our avenging Hand;
The Question, whose Solution I require, 
Is what the Sex of Women most desire? 
In this Dispute thy Judges are at Strife; 
Beware, for on thy Wit depends thy Life 
Yet (lest surprizd, unknowing what to say,
Thou damn thy self) we give thee farther Day: 
A Year is thine to wander at thy Will:  
And learn from others, if thou wantst the Skill. 
But, not to hold our Proffer [as] in Scorn, 
Good Sureties will we have for thy return;
That at the time prefixd thou shalt obey,  
And at thy Pledges Peril keep thy Day.  
Woe was the Knight at this severe Command!  
But well he knew twas bootless to withstand: 
The Terms accepted as the Fair ordain,
He put in Bail for his return again;  
And promisd Answer at the Day assignd,  
The best, with Heavns Assistance, he could find.  
His Leave thus taken, on his Way he went  
With heavy Heart, and full of Discontent,
Misdoubting much, and fearful of th Event. 
Twas hard the Truth of such a Point to find, 
As was not yet agreed among the Kind. 
Thus on he went; still anxious more and more, 
Askd all he met; and knockd at evry Door;
Enquird of Men; but made his chief Request 
To learn from Women what they lovd the best. 
They answerd each according to her Mind, 
To please her self, not all the Female Kind.  
One was for Wealth, another was for Place:
Crones old and ugly, wishd a better Face;  
The Widows Wish was oftentimes to Wed; 
The wanton Maids were all for Sport a Bed.  
Some said the Sex were pleasd with handsom Lies, 
And some gross Flattry lovd without disguise:
Truth is, says one, he seldom fails to win  
Who Flatters well; for thats our darling Sin.  
But long Attendance, and a duteous Mind,  
Will work evn with the wisest of the Kind. 
One thought the Sexes prime Felicity
Was from the Bonds of Wedlock to be free; 
Their Pleasures, Hours, and Actions all their own,  
And uncontrolld to give Account to none. 
Some wish a Husband-Fool; but such are curst, 
For Fools perverse, of Husbands are the worst:
All Women woud be counted Chast and Wise,  
Nor should our Spouses see, but with our Eyes;  
For Fools will prate; and tho they want the Wit  
To find close Faults, yet open Blots will hit:  
Tho better for their Ease to hold their Tongue,
For Womankind was never in the Wrong. 
So Noise ensues, and Quarrels last for Life;  
The Wife abhors the Fool, the Fool the Wife.  
And some Men say, that great Delight have we, 
To be for Truth extolld, and Secrecy:
And constant in one Purpose still to dwell; 
And not our Husbands Counsels to reveal. 
But thats a Fable: for our Sex is frail, 
Inventing rather than not tell a Tale.  
Like leaky Sives no Secrets we can hold:
Witness the famous Tale that Ovid told. 
Midas the King, as in his Book appears, 
By Phbus was endowd with Asses Ears,  
Which under his long Locks, he well conceald 
(As Monarchs Vices must not be reveald),
For fear the People have em in the Wind, 
Who long ago were neither Dumb nor Blind; 
Nor apt to think from Heavn their Title springs, 
Since Jove and Mars left off begetting Kings. 
This Midas knew; and durst communicate
To none but to his Wife, his Ears of State; 
One must be trusted, and he thought her fit,  
As passing prudent; and a parlous Wit.  
To this sagacious Confessor he went,  
And told her what a Gift the Gods had sent;
But told it under Matrimonial Seal, 
With strict Injunction never to reveal. 
The Secret heard she plighted him her Troth,  
(And sacred sure is every Womans Oath) 
The royal Malady should rest unknown
Both for her Husbands Honour and her own:  
But neertheless she pind with Discontent; 
The Counsel rumbled till it found a vent. 
The Thing she knew she was obligd to hide; 
By Intrest and by Oath the Wife was tyd;
But if she told it not, the Woman dyd. 
Loath to betray a Husband and a Prince, 
But she must burst, or blab; and no pretence  
Of Honour tyd her Tongue from Self-defence.  
A marshy Ground commodiously was near,
Thither she ran, and held her Breath for fear,  
Lest if a Word she spoke of any Thing,  
That Word might be the Secret of the King.  
Thus full of Counsel to the Fen she went, 
Gripd all the way, and longing for a vent:
Arrivd, by pure Necessity compelld, 
On her majestick mary-bones she kneeld:  
Then to the Waters-brink she laid her Head, 
And, as a Bittour bumps within a Reed,  
To thee alone, O Lake, she said, I tell
(And as thy Queen command thee to conceal)  
Beneath his Locks the King my Husband wears 
A goodly Royal pair of Asses Ears:  
Now I have easd my Bosom of the Pain 
Till the next longing Fit return again!
Thus through a Woman was the Secret known;  
Tell us, and in effect you tell the Town: 
But to my Tale: The knight with heavy Cheer,  
Wandring in vain, had now consumd the Year:  
One Day was only left to solve the Doubt,
Yet knew no more than when he first set out.  
But home he must: And as th Award had been,  
Yield up his Body Captive to the Queen. 
In this despairing State he hapd to ride,  
As Fortune led him, by a Forest-side:
Lonely the Vale, and full of Horror stood,  
Brown with the shade of a religious Wood: 
When full before him at the Noon of night,  
(The Moon was up, and shot a gleamy Light)  
He saw a Quire of Ladies in a round,
That featly footing seemd to skim the Ground:  
Thus dancing Hand in Hand, so light they were,  
He knew not where they trod, on Earth or Air. 
At speed he drove, and came a suddain Guest,  
In hope where many Women were, at least,
Some one by chance might answer his Request.  
But faster than his Horse the Ladies flew,  
And in a trice were vanishd out of view. 
One only Hag remaind: But fowler far 
Than Grandame Apes in Indian Forests are:
Against a witherd Oak she leand her weight, 
Propd on her trusty Staff, not half upright, 
And dropd an awkard Courtsy to the Knight.  
Then said, What make you, Sir, so late abroad 
Without a Guide, and this no beaten Road?
Or want you aught that here you hope to find, 
Or travel for some Trouble in your Mind?  
The last I guess; and, if I read aright,  
Those of our Sex are bound to serve a Knight: 
Perhaps good Counsel may your Grief asswage,
Then tell your pain: For Wisdom is in Age.  
To this the Knight: Good Mother, woud you know 
The secret Cause and Spring of all my Woe?  
My Life must with to Morrows Light expire, 
Unless I tell, what Women most desire:
Now coud you help me at this hard Essay, 
Or for your inborn Goodness, or for Pay:  
Yours is my Life, redeemd by your Advice,  
Ask what you please, and I will pay the Price:  
The proudest Kerchief of the Court shall rest
Well satisfyd of what they love the best.  
Plight me thy Faith, quoth she: That what I ask 
Thy Danger over, and performd the Task;  
That shalt thou give for Hire of thy Demand;  
Here take thy Oath, and seal it on my Hand;
I warrant thee, on Peril of my Life,  
Thy Words shall please both Widow, Maid, and Wife.  
More Words there needed not to move the Knight, 
To take her Offer, and his Truth to plight. 
With that she spread her Mantle on the Ground,
And first enquiring whether he was bound, 
Bade him not fear, tho long and rough the Way, 
At Court he should arrive eer break of Day 
His Horse should find the way without a Guide.  
She said: With Fury they began to ride,
He on the midst, the Beldam at his Side.  
The Horse, what Devil drove I cannot tell,  
But only this, they sped their Journey well:  
And all the way the Crone informd the Knight,  
How he should answer the Demand aright.
To Court they came: The News was quickly spread 
Of his returning to redeem his Head.  
The Female Senate was assembled soon, 
With all the Mob of Women in the Town:  
The Queen sate Lord Chief Justice of the Hall,
And bad the Cryer cite the Criminal.  
The Knight appeard; and Silence they proclaim, 
Then first the Culprit answerd to his Name;  
And after Forms of Laws, was last requird  
To name the Thing that Women most desird.
Th Offender, taught his Lesson by the way, 
And by his Counsel orderd what to say, 
Thus bold began; My Lady Liege, said he,  
What all your Sex desire is Soveraignty.  
The Wife affects her Husband to command;
All must be hers, both Mony, House, and Land. 
The Maids are Mistresses evn in their Name;  
And of their Servants full Dominion claim.  
This, at the Peril of my Head, I say  
A blunt plain Truth, the Sex aspires to sway,
You to rule all; while we, like Slaves, obey. 
There was not one, or Widow, Maid, or Wife, 
But said the Knight had well deservd his Life. 
Evn fair Geneura, with a Blush confessd,  
The Man had found what Women love the best.
Upstarts the Beldam, who was there unseen,  
And Reverence made, accosted thus the Queen.  
My Liege, said she, before the Court arise, 
May I poor Wretch find Favour in your Eyes, 
To grant my just Request: Twas I who taught
The Knight this Answer, and inspird his Thought. 
None but a Woman could a Man direct 
To tell us Women, what we most affect.  
But first I swore him on his Knightly Troth,  
(And here demand performance of his Oath)
To grant the Boon that next I should desire;  
He gave his Faith, and I expect my Hire:  
My Promise is fulfilld: I savd his Life,  
And claim his Debt, to take me for his Wife.  
The Knight was askd, nor coud his Oath deny,
But hopd they would not force him to comply. 
The Women, who would rather wrest the Laws, 
Than let a Sister-Plaintiff lose the Cause, 
(As Judges on the Bench more gracious are,  
And more attent to Brothers of the Bar)
Cryd, one and all, the Suppliant should have Right,  
And to the Grandame-Hag adjudgd the Knight.  
In vain he sighd, and oft with Tears desird 
Some reasonable Sute might be requird. 
But still the Crone was constant to her Note;
The more he spoke, the more she stretchd her Throat. 
In vain he profferd all his Goods, to save 
His Body, destind to that living Grave.  
The liquorish Hag rejects the Pelf with scorn:  
And nothing but the Man would serve her turn.
Not all the Wealth of Eastern Kings, said she,  
Have Powr to part my plighted Love, and me;  
And, Old, and Ugly as I am, and Poor; 
Yet never will I break the Faith I swore; 
For mine thou art by Promise, during Life,
And I thy loving and obedient Wife. 
My Love! Nay, rather my Damnation Thou, 
Said he: Nor am I bound to keep my Vow: 
The Fiend thy Sire has sent thee from below,  
Else how coudst thou my secret Sorrows know?
Avaunt, old Witch, for I renounce thy Bed:  
The Queen may take the Forfeit of my Head,  
Eer any of my Race so foul a Crone shall wed.  
Both heard, the Judge pronouncd against the Knight;  
So was he Marryd in his own despight;
And all Day after hid him as an Owl,  
Not able to sustain a Sight so foul.  
Perhaps the Reader thinks I do him wrong  
To pass the Marriage-Feast and Nuptial Song:  
Mirth there was none, the Man was a-la-mort,
And little Courage had to make his Court. 
To Bed they went, the Bridegroom and the Bride: 
Was never such an ill-paird Couple tyd. 
Restless he tossd, and tumbled to and fro, 
And rowld, and wriggled further off; for Woe.
The good old Wife lay smiling by his Side,  
And caught him in her quivring Arms, and cryd,  
When you my ravishd Predecessor saw, 
You were not then become this Man of Straw; 
Had you been such, you might have scapd the Law.
Is this the Custom of King Arthurs Court?  
Are all Round-Table Knights of such a sort? 
Remember I am she who savd your Life,  
Your loving, lawful, and complying Wife:  
Not thus you swore in your unhappy Hour,
Nor I for this return employd my Powr.  
In time of Need I was your faithful Friend; 
Nor did I since, nor ever will offend.  
Believe me, my lovd Lord, tis much unkind;  
What Fury has possessed your alterd Mind?
Thus on my Wedding-nightWithout Pretence  
Come, turn this way, or tell me my Offence. 
If not your Wife, let Reasons Rule persuade,  
Name but my Fault, amends shall soon be made. 
Amends! Nay, thats impossible, said he,
What change of Age, or Ugliness can be! 
Or could Medeas Magick mend thy Face,  
Thou art descended from so mean a Race, 
That never Knight was matchd with such Disgrace. 
What wonder, Madam, if I move my Side,
When, if I turn, I turn to such a Bride?  
And is this all that troubles you so sore!  
And what the Devil coudst thou wish me more? 
Ah Benedicite, replyd the Crone: 
Then cause of just Complaining have you none.
The Remedy to this were soon applyd, 
Woud you be like the Bridegroom to the Bride.  
But, for you say a long descended Race, 
And Wealth, and Dignity, and Powr, and Place,  
Make Gentlemen, and that your high Degree
Is much disparagd to be matchd with me; 
Know this, my Lord, Nobility of Blood 
Is but a glittring, and fallacious Good: 
The Nobleman is he whose noble Mind 
Is filld with inborn Worth, unborrowd from his Kind.
The King of Heavn was in a Manger laid;  
And took his Earth but from an humble Maid: 
Then what can Birth, or mortal Men bestow,  
Since Floods no higher than their Fountains flow? 
We who for Name, and empty Honour strive,
Our true Nobility from him derive.  
Your Ancestors, who puff your Mind with Pride.  
And vast Estates to mighty Titles tyd, 
Did not your Honour, but their own advance, 
For Virtue comes not by Inheritance.
If you tralineate from your Fathers Mind,  
What are you else but of a Bastard-kind?  
Do, as your great Progenitors have done,  
And by their virtues prove your self their Son. 
No Father can infuse, or Wit or Grace;
A Mother comes across, and marrs the Race.  
A Grandsire or a Grandame taints the Blood; 
And seldom three Descents continue Good.  
Were Virtue by Descent, a noble Name  
Could never villanize his Fathers Fame:
But, as the first the last of all the Line, 
Woud like the Sun evn in Descending shine.  
Take Fire, and bear it to the darkest House 
Betwixt King Arthurs Court and Caucasus, 
If you depart, the Flame shall still remain,
And the bright Blaze enlighten all the Plain; 
Nor, till the Fewel perish, can decay,  
By Nature formd on Things combustible to prey. 
Such is not Man, who mixing better Seed 
With worse, begets a base, degenerate Breed:
The Bad corrupts the Good, and leaves behind  
No trace of all the great Begetters Mind.  
The Father sinks within his Son, we see,  
And often rises in the third Degree;  
If better Luck, a better Mother give:
Chance gave us being, and by Chance we live.  
Such as our Atoms were, evn such are we, 
Or call it Chance, or strong Necessity. 
Thus, loaded with dead weight, the Will is free.  
And thus it needs must be: For Seed conjoind
Lets into Natures Work th imperfect Kind: 
But Fire, th enlivner of the general Frame, 
Is one, its Operation still the same. 
Its Principle is in it self: While ours 
Works, as Confederates War, with mingled Powrs:
Or Man, or Woman, which soever fails; 
And, oft, the Vigour of the Worse prevails. 
ther with Sulphur blended alters hue,  
And casts a dusky gleam of Sodom blue.  
Thus in a Brute, their ancient Honour ends,
And the fair Mermaid in a Fish descends:  
The Line is gone; no longer Duke or Earl; 
But by himself degraded turns a Churl.  
Nobility of Blood is but Renown 
Of thy great Fathers by their Virtue known,
And a long trail of Light, to thee descending down. 
If in thy Smoke it ends, their Glories shine; 
But Infamy and Villanage are thine. 
Then what I said before, is plainly showd, 
That true Nobility proceeds from God:
Nor left us by Inheritance, but givn 
By Bounty of our Stars, and Grace of Heaven.  
Thus from a Captive Servius Tullus rose,  
Whom for his Virtues, the first Romans chose: 
Fabritius from their Walls repelld the Foe,
Whose noble Hands had exercisd the Plough. 
From hence, my Lord, and Love, I thus conclude, 
That tho my homely Ancestors were rude,  
Mean as I am, yet I may have the Grace  
To make you Father of a generous Race:
And Noble then am I, when I begin,  
In Virtue cloathd, to cast the Rags of Sin:  
If Poverty be my upbraided Crime, 
And you believe in Heavn; there was a time,  
When He, the great Controller of our Fate
Deignd to be Man, and lived in low Estate: 
Which he who had the World at his dispose,  
If Poverty were Vice, woud never choose. 
Philosophers have said, and Poets sing, 
That a glad Povertys an honest Thing.
Content is Wealth, the Riches of the Mind;  
And happy He who can that Treasure find,  
But the base Miser starves amidst his Store,  
Broods on his Gold, and griping still at more 
Sits sadly pining, and believes hes Poor.
The ragged Beggar, tho he wants Relief,  
Has not to lose, and sings before the Thief.  
Want is a bitter, and a hateful Good, 
Because its Virtues are not understood. 
Yet many Things, impossible to Thought,
Have been by Need to full Perfection brought: 
The daring of the Soul proceeds from thence,  
Sharpness of Wit, and active Diligence: 
Prudence at once, and Fortitude it gives, 
And if in patience taken mends our Lives;
For evn that Indigence that brings me low  
Makes me my self and Him above to know. 
A Good which none would challenge, few would choose,  
A fair Possession, which Mankind refuse.  
If we from Wealth to Poverty descend,
Want gives to know the Flattrer from the Friend. 
If I am Old, and Ugly, well for you,  
No leud Adultrer will my Love pursue;  
Nor Jealousy, the Bane of marryd Life, 
Shall haunt you, for a witherd homely Wife:
For Age, and Ugliness, as all agree,  
Are the best Guards of Female Chastity. 
Yet since I see your Mind is Worldly bent,  
Ill do my best to further your Content.  
And therefore of two Gifts in my dispose,
Think eer you speak, I grant you leave to choose:  
Woud you I should be still Deformd, and Old,  
Nauseous to Touch, and Loathsome to Behold; 
On this Condition, to remain for life 
A careful, tender and obedient Wife,
In all I can contribute to your Ease, 
And not in Deed, or Word, or Thought displease? 
Or would you rather have me Young and Fair, 
And take the Chance that happens to your share? 
Temptations are in Beauty, and in Youth,
And how can you depend upon my Truth? 
Now weigh the Danger with the doubtful Bliss, 
And thank your self, if ought should fall amiss.  
Sore sighd the Knight, who this long Sermon heard; 
At length considering all, his Heart he cheard,
And thus replyd, My Lady, and my Wife, 
To your wise Conduct I resign my Life:  
Choose you for me, for well you understand  
The future Good and Ill, on either Hand:  
But if an humble Husband may request,
Provide, and order all Things for the best; 
Yours be the Care to profit, and to please:  
And let your Subject-Servant take his Ease. 
Then thus in Peace, quoth she, concludes the Strife,  
Since I am turnd the Husband, you the Wife:
The Matrimonial Victory is mine,  
Which having fairly gaind, I will resign;  
Forgive if I have said, or done amiss,  
And seal the Bargain with a Friendly Kiss:  
I promisd you but one Content to share.
But now I will become both Good, and Fair.  
No Nuptial Quarrel shall disturb your Ease, 
The Business of my Life shall be to please: 
And for my Beauty that, as Time shall try;  
But draw the Curtain first, and cast your Eye.
He lookd, and saw a Creature heavnly Fair,  
In bloom of Youth, and of a charming Air. 
With Joy he turnd, and seizd her Ivry Arm; 
And like Pygmalion found the Statue warm. 
Small Arguments there needed to prevail,
A Storm of Kisses pourd as thick as Hail.  
Thus long in mutual Bliss they lay embraced,  
And their first Love continud to the last: 
One Sun-shine was their Life; no Cloud between; 
Nor ever was a kinder Couple seen.
And so may all our Lives like theirs be led; 
Heavn send the Maids young Husbands, fresh in Bed: 
May Widows Wed as often as they can,  
And ever for the better change their Man. 
And some devouring Plague pursue their Lives,
Who will not well be governd by their Wives.

**
The Character of a Good Parson
***

A PARISH-PRIEST was of the Pilgrim-Train; 
An Awful, Reverend, and Religious Man.  
His Eyes diffusd a venerable Grace,  
And Charity it self was in his Face.  
Rich was his Soul, though his Attire was poor;
(As God had cloathd his own Embassador;) 
For such, on Earth, his blessd Redeemer bore.  
Of Sixty Years he seemd; and well might last 
To Sixty more, but that he livd too fast;  
Refind himself to Soul, to curb the Sense;
And made almost a Sin of Abstinence.  
Yet, had his Aspect nothing of severe,  
But such a Face as promisd him sincere.  
Nothing reservd or sullen was to see,  
But sweet Regards; and pleasing Sanctity:
Mild was his Accent, and his Action free. 
With Eloquence innate his Tongue was armd; 
Tho harsh the Precept, yet the Preacher charmd; 
For, letting down the golden Chain from high, 
He drew his Audience upward to the Sky:
And oft, with holy Hymns, he charmd their Ears 
(A Musick more melodious than the Spheres.) 
For David left him, when he went to rest, 
His Lyre; and after him, he sung the best.  
He bore his great Commission in his Look:
But sweetly temperd Awe, and softend all he spoke.  
He preachd the Joys of Heavn and Pains of Hell; 
And warnd the Sinner with becoming Zeal; 
But on Eternal Mercy lovd to dwell.  
He taught the Gospel rather than the Law:
And forcd himself to drive; but lovd to draw. 
For Fear but freezes Minds; but Love, like Heat,  
Exhales the Soul sublime, to seek her Native Seat.  
To Threats, the stubborn Sinner oft is hard,  
Wrapd in his Crimes, against the Storm prepard;
But, when the milder Beams of Mercy play, 
He melts, and throws his cumbrous Cloak away.  
Lightnings and Thunder (Heavns Artillery)  
As Harbingers before th Almighty fly:  
Those, but proclaim his Stile, and disappear;
The stiller Sound succeeds; and God is there. 
The Tythes, his Parish freely paid, he took;  
But never Sud; or Cursd with Bell and Book. 
With Patience bearing wrong; but offring none: 
Since every Man is free to lose his own.
The Country-Churles, according to their Kind, 
(Who grudge their Dues, and love to be behind,) 
The less he sought his Offrings, pinchd the more; 
And praisd a Priest, contented to be Poor. 
Yet, of his little, he had some to spare,
To feed the Famishd, and to cloath the Bare: 
For Mortifyd he was to that degree,  
A poorer than himself, he woud not see 
True Priests, he said, and Preachers of the Word, 
Were only Stewards of their Soveraign Lord,
Nothing was theirs; but all the publick Store,  
Intrusted Riches to relieve the Poor. 
Who, shoud they steal, for want of his Relief  
He judgd himself Accomplice with the Thief.  
Wide was his Parish; not contracted close
In Streets, but here and there a straggling House;  
Yet still he was at Hand, without Request 
To serve the Sick; to succour the Distressd; 
Tempting, on Foot, alone, without affright, 
The Dangers of a dark, tempestuous Night.
All this the good old Man performd alone,  
Nor spard his pains; for Curate he had none. 
Nor durst he trust another with his Care; 
Nor rode himself to Pauls, the publick Fair,  
To chaffer for Preferment with his Gold,
Where Bishopricks, and sine Cures are sold. 
But duly watchd his Flock, by Night and Day; 
And from the prowling Wolf, redeemd the Prey,  
And hungry sent the wily Fox away.  
The Proud he tamd, the Penitent he cheard:
Nor to rebuke the rich Offender feard. 
His Preaching much, but more his Practice wrought;  
(A living Sermon of the Truths he taught;)  
For this by Rules severe his Life he squard: 
That all might see the Doctrin which they heard.
For Priests, he said, are Patterns for the rest:  
(The Gold of Heavn, who bear the God Impressd:) 
But when the precious Coin is kept unclean, 
The Soveraigns Image is no longer seen.  
If they be foul, on whom the People trust,
Well may the baser Brass contract a rust. 
The Prelate for his Holy Life he prizd;  
The worldly Pomp of Prelacy despisd. 
His Saviour came not with a gawdy Show, 
Nor was his Kingdom of the World below.
Patience in Want, and Poverty of Mind,  
These Marks of Church and Churchmen he designd,  
And living taught; and dying left behind. 
The Crown he wore was of the pointed Thorn: 
In Purple he was Crucifyd, not born.
They who contend for Place and high Degree, 
Are not his Sons, but those of Zebadee. 
Not, but he knew the Signs of Earthly Powr 
Might well become St. Peters Successor;  
The Holy Father holds a double Reign,
The Prince may keep his Pomp; the Fisher must be plain. 
Such was the Saint; who shone with every Grace: 
Reflecting, Moses-like, his Makers Face. 
God saw his Image lively was expressd; 
And his own Work, as in Creation, blessd.
The Tempter saw him too, with envious Eye,  
And, as on Job, demanded leave to try.  
He took the time when Richard was deposd,  
And High and Low with happy Harry closd. 
This Prince, tho great in Arms, the Priest withstood,
Near tho he was, yet not the next of Blood.  
Had Richard unconstraind, resignd the Throne, 
A King can give no more than is his own:  
The Title stood entaild, had Richard had a Son.  
Conquest, an odious Name, was laid aside,
Where all submitted, none the Battle tryd. 
The senseless Plea of Right by Providence,  
Was, by a flattring Priest, invented since:  
And lasts no longer than the present sway;  
But justifies the next who comes in play.
The Peoples Right remains; let those who dare  
Dispute their Powr, when they the Judges are.  
He joind not in their Choice; because he knew  
Worse might, and often did from Change ensue. 
Much to himself he thought; but little spoke:
And, Undeprivd, his Benefice forsook.  
Now, through the Land, his Cure of Souls he stretchd,  
And like a Primitive Apostle preachd.  
Still Chearful; ever Constant to his Call;  
By many followd; Lovd by most, Admird by All.
With what he begd, his Brethren he relievd; 
And gave the Charities himself receivd;  
Gave, while he Taught; and Edifyd the more,  
Because he shewd by Proof, twas easy to be Poor.  
He went not, with the Crowd, to see a Shrine;
But fed us by the way, with Food divine.  
In deference to his Virtues, I forbear  
To show you, what the rest in Orders were 
This Brillant is so Spotless, and so Bright,  
He needs no Foyl: But shines by his own proper Light.

**
Sigismonda and Guiscardo
***

WHILE Norman Tancred in Salerno reignd,  
The Title of a Gracious Prince he gaind; 
Till turnd a Tyrant in his latter Days,  
He lost the Lustre of his former Praise,  
And from the bright Meridian where he stood
Descending, dippd his Hands in Lovers Blood. 
This Prince, of Fortunes Favour long possessd, 
Yet was with one fair Daughter only blessd;  
And blessd he might have been with her alone:  
But oh! how much more happy, had he none!
She was his Care, his Hope, and his Delight,  
Most in his Thought, and ever in his Sight: 
Next, nay beyond his Life, he held her dear;  
She livd by him, and now he livd in her.  
For this, when ripe for Marriage, he delayd
Her Nuptial Bands, and kept her long a Maid,  
As envying any else should share a Part 
Of what was his, and claiming all her Heart.  
At length, as Publick Decency requird, 
And all his Vassals eagerly desird,
With Mind averse, he rather underwent 
His Peoples Will than gave his own Consent  
So was she torn, as from a Lovers Side,  
And made almost in his despite a Bride. 
Short were her Marriage-Joys; for in the Prime
Of Youth, her Lord expird before his time; 
And to her Fathers Court in little space 
Restord anew, she held a higher Place; 
More lovd, and more exalted into Grace.  
This Princess fresh and young, and fair, and wise,
The worshippd Idol of her Fathers Eyes, 
Did all her Sex in evry Grace exceed,  
And had more Wit beside than Women need.  
Youth, Health, and Ease, and most an amorous Mind,  
To second Nuptials had her Thoughts inclind;
And former Joys had left a secret Sting behind. 
But, prodigal in evry other Grant, 
Her Sire left unsupplyd her only Want; 
And she, betwixt her Modesty and Pride, 
Her Wishes, which she could not help, would hide.
Resolvd at last to lose no longer Time,  
And yet to please her self without a Crime, 
She cast her Eyes around the Court, to find 
A worthy Subject suiting to her Mind, 
To him in holy Nuptials to be tyd,
A seeming Widow, and a secret Bride.  
Among the Train of Courtiers, one she found 
With all the Gifts of bounteous Nature crownd, 
Of gentle Blood; but one whose niggard Fate 
Had set him far below her high Estate;
Guiscard his Name was calld, of blooming Age,  
Now Squire to Tancred, and before his Page; 
To him, the Choice of all the shining Crowd,  
Her Heart the noble Sigismonda vowd. 
Yet hitherto she kept her Love conceald,
And with close Glances evry Day beheld 
The graceful Youth; and evry Day increasd 
The raging Fire that burnd within her Breast;  
Some secret Charm did all his Acts attend,  
And what his Fortune wanted, hers could mend;
Till, as the Fire will force its outward way, 
Or, in the Prison pent, consume the Prey; 
So long her earnest Eyes on his were set, 
At length their twisted Rays together met;  
And he, surprizd with humble Joy, surveyd
One sweet Regard, shot by the Royal Maid: 
Not well assurd, while doubtful Hopes he nursd, 
A second Glance came gliding like the first;  
And he, who saw the Sharpness of the Dart,  
Without Defence receivd it in his Heart.
In Publick though their Passion wanted Speech,  
Yet mutual Looks interpreted for each:  
Time, Ways, and Means of Meeting were denyd, 
But all those Wants ingenious Love supplyd.  
Th inventive God, who never fails his Part,
Inspires the Wit, when once he warms the Heart. 
When Guiscard next was in the Circle seen,  
Where Sigismonda held the Place of Queen, 
A hollow Cane within her Hand she brought,  
But in the Concave had enclosd a Note;
With this she seemd to play, and, as in sport, 
Tossd to her Love, in presence of the Court; 
Take it, she said; and when your Needs require, 
This little Brand will serve to light your Fire.  
He took it with a Bow, and soon divind
The seeming Toy was not for nought designd:  
But when retird, so long with curious Eyes 
He viewd the Present, that he found the Prize. 
Much was in little writ; and all conveyd 
With cautious Care, for fear to be betrayd
By some false Confident or Favrite Maid. 
The Time, the Place, the Manner how to meet,  
Were all in punctual Order plainly writ:  
But since a Trust must be, she thought it best  
To put it out of Laymens Powr at least,
And for their solemn Vows prepard a Priest.  
Guiscard (her secret purpose understood)  
With Joy prepard to meet the coming Good;  
Nor Pains nor Danger was resolvd to spare, 
But use the Means appointed by the Fair.
Near the proud Palace of Salerno stood  
A Mount of rough Ascent, and thick with Wood; 
Through this a Cave was dug with vast Expence,  
The Work it seemd of some suspicious Prince, 
Who, when abusing Powr with lawless Might,
From Publick Justice would secure his Flight. 
The Passage made by many a winding Way, 
Reachd evn the Room in which the Tyrant lay.  
Fit for his purpose, on a lower Floor 
He lodgd, whose Issue was an Iron Door,
From whence, by Stairs descending to the Ground,  
In the blind Grot a safe Retreat he found.  
Its Outlet ended in a Brake oergrown 
With Brambles, choakd by Time, and now unknown.  
A Rift there was, which from the Mountains Height
Conveyd a glimmring and malignant Light,  
A Breathing-place to draw the Damps away, 
A Twilight of an intercepted Day. 
The Tyrants Den, whose Use, though lost to Fame,  
Was now th Apartment of the Royal Dame;
The Cavern, only to her Father known, 
By him was to his Darling-Daughter shown. 
Neglected long she let the Secret rest, 
Till Love recalld it to her labring Breast, 
And hinted as the Way by Heavn designd
The Teacher, by the Means he taught, to blind.  
What will not Women do, when Need inspires  
Their Wit, or Love their Inclination fires! 
Though Jealousie of State th Invention found,  
Yet Love refind upon the former Ground.
That Way, the tyrant had reservd, to fly 
Pursuing Hate, now servd to bring two Lovers nigh. 
The Dame, who long in vain had kept the Key,  
Bold by Desire, explord the secret Way;  
Now tryd the Stairs, and wading through the Night,
Searchd all the deep Recess, and issud into Light.  
All this her Letter had so well explaind,  
Th instructed Youth might compass what remaind; 
The Cavern-mouth alone was hard to find,  
Because the Path disusd, was out of mind:
But in what Quarter of the Cops it lay, 
His Eye by certain Level could survey:  
Yet (for the Wood perplexd with Thorns he knew)  
A Frock of Leather oer his Limbs he drew;  
And thus provided, searchd the Brake around,
Till the choakd Entry of the Cave he found.  
Thus, all prepard, the promisd Hour arrived,  
So long expected, and so well contrivd:  
With Love to Friend, th impatient Lover went,  
Fencd from the Thorns, and trod the deep Descent.
The conscious Priest, who was subornd before,  
Stood ready posted at the Postern-door; 
The Maids in distant Rooms were sent to rest, 
And nothing wanted but th invited Guest. 
He came, and, knocking thrice, without delay,
The longing Lady heard, and turnd the Key; 
At once invaded him with all her Charms,  
And the first Step he made, was in her Arms:  
The Leathern Out-side, boistrous as it was, 
Gave way, and bent beneath her strict Embrace:
On either Side the Kisses flew so thick,  
That neither he nor she had Breath to speak.  
The holy Man amazd at what he saw, 
Made haste to sanctifie the Bliss by Law; 
And mutterd fast the Matrimony ore,
For fear committed Sin should get before. 
His Work performd, he left the Pair alone, 
Because he knew he could not go too soon; 
His Presence odious, when his Task was done.  
What Thoughts he had beseems not me to say,
Though some surmise he went to fast and pray, 
And needed both, to drive the tempting Thoughts away. 
The Foe once gone, they took their full Delight;  
Twas restless Rage, and Tempest all the night: 
For greedy Love each Moment would employ,
And grudgd the shortest Pauses of their Joy. 
Thus were their Loves auspiciously begun, 
And thus with secret Care were carried on,  
The Stealth it self did Appetite restore, 
And lookd so like a Sin, it pleasd the more.
The Cave was now become a common Way, 
The Wicket, often opend, knew the Key: 
Love rioted secure, and long enjoyd, 
Was ever eager, and was never cloyd. 
But as Extremes are short, of Ill and Good,
And Tides at highest Mark regorge the Flood;  
So Fate, that could no more improve their Joy,  
Took a malicious Pleasure to destroy. 
Tancred, who fondly lovd, and whose Delight  
Was placd in his fair Daughters daily Sight
Of Custom, when his State-Affairs were done,  
Would pass his pleasing Hours with her alone: 
And, as a Fathers Privilege allowd, 
Without Attendance of th officious Crowd.  
It happend once, that when in Heat of Day
He tryd to sleep, as was his usual Way,  
The balmy Slumber fled his wakeful Eyes,  
And forcd him, in his own despite, to rise:  
Of Sleep forsaken, to relieve his Care, 
He sought the Conversation of the Fair;
But with her Train of Damsels she was gone, 
In shady Walks the scorching Heat to shun:  
He would not violate that sweet Recess, 
And found besides a welcome Heaviness 
That seizd his Eyes; and Slumber, which forgot
When called before to come, now came unsought.  
From Light retird, behind his Daughters Bed, 
He for approaching Sleep composd his Head; 
A Chair was ready, for that Use designd, 
So quilted that he lay at ease reclind;
The Curtains closely drawn, the Light to skreen,  
As if he had contrivd to lie unseen: 
Thus coverd with an artificial Night,  
Sleep did his Office soon, and seald his Sight.  
With Heavn averse, in this ill-omend Hour
Was Guiscard summond to the secret Bowr,  
And the fair Nymph, with Expectation fird, 
From her attending Damsels was retird: 
For, true to Love, she measurd Time so right 
As not to miss one Moment of Delight.
The Garden, seated on the level Floor,  
She left behind, and locking evry Door,  
Thought all secure; but little did she know,  
Blind to her Fate, she had inclosd her Foe.  
Attending Guiscard in his Leathern Frock
Stood ready, with his thrice-repeated Knock:  
Thrice with a doleful Sound the jarring Grate 
Rung deaf, and hollow, and presagd their Fate. 
The Door unlockd, to known Delight they haste, 
And panting in each others Arms, embracd,
Rush to the conscious Bed, a mutual Freight,  
And heedless press it with their wonted Weight. 
The sudden Bound awakd the sleeping Sire,  
And shewd a Sight no Parent can desire:  
His opening Eyes at once with odious View
The Love discoverd, and the Lover knew:  
He would have cryd; but hoping that he dreamt, 
Amazement tyd his Tongue, and stoppd th Attempt. 
Th ensuing Moment all the Truth declard,  
But now he stood collected, and prepard;
For Malice and Revenge had put him on his Guard.  
So, like a Lion that unheeded lay,  
Dissembling Sleep, and watchful to betray,  
With inward Rage he meditates his Prey. 
The thoughtless Pair, indulging their Desires,
Alternate kindld and then quenchd their Fires;  
Nor thinking in the Shades of Death they playd,  
Full of themselves, themselves alone surveyd,  
And, too secure, were by themselves betrayd. 
Long time dissolvd in Pleasure thus they lay,
Till Nature could no more suffice their Play: 
Then rose the Youth, and through the Cave again 
Returnd; the Princess mingld with her Train.  
Resolvd his unripe Vengeance to defer, 
The Royal Spy, when now the Coast was clear,
Sought not the Garden, but retird unseen,  
To brood in secret on his gatherd Spleen,  
And methodize Revenge: To Death he grievd; 
And, but he saw the Crime, had scarce believd. 
Th Appointment for th ensuing Night he heard;
And therefore in the Cavern had prepard  
Two brawny Yeomen of his trusty Guard.  
Scarce had unwary Guiscard set his Foot 
Within the farmost Entrance of the Grot,  
When these in secret Ambush ready lay,
And rushing on the sudden, seizd the Prey: 
Encumberd with his Frock, without defence, 
An easie Prize, they led the Prisner thence, 
And, as commanded, brought before the Prince  
The gloomy Sire, too sensible of Wrong
To vent his Rage in Words, restraind his Tongue; 
And only said, Thus Servants are preferrd  
And trusted, thus their Sovreigns they reward. 
Had I not seen, had not these Eyes receivd 
Too clear a Proof, I could not have believd.
He pausd, and choakd the rest. The Youth, who saw 
His forfeit Life abandond to the Law,  
The Judge th Accuser, and th Offence to him,  
Who had both Powr and Will t avenge the Crime;  
No vain Defence prepard, but thus replyd,
The Faults of Love by Love are justifyd; 
With unresisted Might the Monarch reigns, 
He levels Mountains, and he raises Plains,  
And, not regarding Diffrence of Degree,  
Abasd your Daughter, and exalted me.
This bold Return with seeming Patience heard, 
The Prisner was remitted to the Guard. 
The sullen Tyrant slept not all the Night,  
But lonely walking by a winking Light,  
Sobbd, wept, and groand, and beat his witherd Breast,
But would not violate his Daughters Rest; 
Who long expecting lay, for Bliss prepard, 
Listning for Noise, and grievd that none she heard;  
Oft rose, and oft in vain employd the Key, 
And oft accusd her Lover of Delay,
And passd the tedious Hours in anxious Thoughts away.  
The Morrow came; and at his usual Hour  
Old Tancred visited his Daughters Bowr;  
Her Cheek (for such his Custom was) he kissd,  
Then blessed her kneeling, and her Maids dismissd.
The Royal Dignity thus far maintaind,  
Now left in private, he no longer feignd;  
But all at once his Grief and Rage appeard,  
And Floods of Tears ran trickling down his Beard. 
O Sigismonda, he began to say;
Thrice he began, and thrice was forcd to stay, 
Till Words with often trying found their Way; 
I thought, O Sigismonda, (But how blind 
Are Parents Eyes their Childrens Faults to find!) 
Thy Vertue, Birth, and Breeding were above
A mean Desire, and vulgar sense of Love:  
Nor less than Sight and Hearing could convince  
So fond a Father, and so just, a Prince,  
Of such an unforeseen, and unbelievd Offence.  
Then what indignant Sorrow must I have,
To see thee lie subjected to my Slave!  
A Man so smelling of the Peoples Lee, 
The Court receivd him first for Charity; 
And since with no Degree of Honour gracd,  
But only sufferd where he first was placd:
A grovling Insect still; and so designd 
By Natures Hand, nor born of Noble Kind:  
A Thing by neither Man nor Woman prizd,  
And scarcely known enough to be despisd: 
To what has Heavn reservd my Age? Ah! why
Should Man, when Nature calls, not chuse to die,  
Rather than stretch the Span of Life, to find 
Such Ills as Fate has wisely cast behind, 
For those to feel, whom fond Desire to live 
Makes covetous of more than Life can give!
Each has his Share of Good; and when tis gone, 
The Guest, though hungry, cannot rise too soon. 
But I, expecting more, in my own wrong  
Protracting Life, have livd a Day too long.  
If Yesterday coud be recalld again,
Evn now would I conclude my happy Reign: 
But tis too late, my glorious Race is run, 
And a dark Cloud oertakes my setting Sun.  
Hadst thou not lovd, or loving savd the Shame,  
If not the Sin, by some Illustrious Name,
This little Comfort had relievd my Mind, 
Twas Frailty, not unusual to thy Kind: 
But thy low Fall beneath thy Royal Blood  
Shews downward Appetite to mix with Mud:  
Thus not the least Excuse is left for thee,
Nor the least Refuge for unhappy me.  
For him I have resolvd: whom by Surprize 
I took, and scarce can call it, in Disguise;  
For such was his Attire, as, with Intent  
Of Nature, suited to his mean Descent:
The harder Question yet remains behind, 
What Pains a Parent and a Prince can find 
To punish an Offence of this degenerate Kind. 
As I have lovd, and yet I love thee more 
Than ever Father lovd a Child before;
So, that Indulgence draws me to forgive:  
Nature, that gave thee Life, would have thee live,  
But, as a Publick Parent of the State,  
My Justice, and thy Crime, requires thy Fate. 
Fain would I chuse a middle Course to steer;
Natures too kind, and Justice too severe:  
Speak for us both, and to the Balance bring 
On either side, the Father, and the King. 
Heavn knows, my Heart is bent to favour thee;  
Make it but scanty weight, and leave the rest to me.
Here stopping with a Sigh, he pourd a Flood  
Of Tears, to make his last Expression good. 
She who had heard him speak, nor saw alone  
The secret Conduct of her Love was known, 
But he was taken who her Soul possessd,
Felt all the Pangs of Sorrow in her Breast: 
And little wanted, but a Womans Heart 
With Cries, and Tears had testifid her Smart:  
But in-born Worth; that Fortune can controul, 
New strung, and stiffer bent her softer Soul;
The Heroine assumd the Womans Place, 
Confirmed her Mind, and fortifid her Face: 
Why should she beg, or what coud she pretend,  
When her stern Father had condemned her Friend! 
Her Life she might have had; but her Despair
Of saving, his, had put it past her Care: 
Resolvd on Fate, she would not lose her Breath,  
But rather than not die, sollicit Death.  
Fixd on this Thought, she, not as Women use, 
Her Fault by common Frailty would excuse;
But boldly justifid her Innocence, 
And while the Fact was ownd, denyd th Offence: 
Then with dry Eyes, and with an open Look,  
She met his Glance mid-way, and thus undaunted spoke. 
Tancred, I neither am disposd to make
Request for Life, nor offerd Life to take; 
Much less deny the Deed; but least of all 
Beneath pretended Justice weakly fall.  
My Words to sacred Truth shall be confind, 
My Deeds shall shew the Greatness of my Mind.
That I have lovd, I own; that still I love,  
I call to Witness all the Powrs above: 
Yet more I own; To Guiscards Love I give 
The small remaining Time I have to live;  
And if beyond this Life Desire can be,
Not Fate it self shall set my Passion free. 
This first avowd; nor Folly warpd my Mind,  
Nor the frail Texture of the Female Kind  
Betrayd my Vertue: For too well I knew 
What Honour was, and Honour had his due:
Before the Holy Priest my Vows were tyd, 
So came I not a Strumpet, but a Bride;  
This for my Fame, and for the Publick Voice:  
Yet more, his Merits justifyd my Choice; 
Which had they not, the first Election thine,
That Bond dissolvd, the next is freely mine: 
Or grant I errd, (which yet I must deny,)  
Had Parents Powr evn second Vows to tie,  
Thy little Care to mend my Widowd Nights 
Has forcd me to recourse of Marriage-Rites,
To fill an empty Side, and follow known Delights. 
What have I done in this, deserving Blame?  
State-Laws may alter: Natures are the same 
Those are usurpd on helpless Woman-kind, 
Made without our Consent, and wanting Powr to bind.
Thou, Tancred, better shouldst have understood,  
That, as thy Father gave thee Flesh and Blood,  
So gavst thou me: Not from the Quarry hewd, 
But of a softer Mould, with Sense endud; 
Evn softer than thy own, of suppler Kind,
More exquisite of Taste, and more than man refind. 
Nor needst thou by thy Daughter to be told,  
Though now thy spritely Blood with Age be cold, 
Thou hast been young; and canst remember still, 
That when thou hadst the Powr, thou hadst the Will;
And from the past Experience of thy Fires,  
Canst tell with what a Tide our strong Desires  
Come rushing on in Youth, and what their Rage requires. 
And grant thy Youth was exercisd in Arms,  
When Love no Leisure found for softer Charms,
My tender Age in Luxury was traind,  
With idle Ease and Pageants entertaind;  
My Hours my own, my Pleasures unrestraind. 
So bred, no wonder if I took the Bent 
That seemd evn warranted by thy Consent;
For, when the Father is too fondly kind,  
Such Seed he sows, such Harvest shall he find.  
Blame then thy self, as Reasons Law requires,  
(Since Nature gave, and thou foment st my Fires;) 
If still those Appetites continue strong,
Thou mayest consider I am yet but young 
Consider too, that having been a Wife,  
I must have tasted of a better Life,  
And am not to be blamd, if I renew,  
By lawful Means, the Joys which then I knew.
Where was the Crime, if Pleasure I procurd,  
Young, and a Woman, and to Bliss inurd?  
That was my Case, and this is my Defence; 
I pleasd my self, I shunned Incontinence,  
And, urgd by strong Desires, indulgd my Sense.
Left to my self, I must avow, I strove  
From publick Shame to screen my secret Love,  
And, well acquainted with thy Native Pride, 
Endeavourd, what I could not help, to hide,  
For which a Womans Wit an easie Way supplyd.
How this, so well contrivd, so closely laid, 
Was known to thee, or by what Chance betrayd,  
Is not my Care: To please thy Pride alone 
I could have wishd it had been still unknown.  
Nor took I Guiscard by blind Fancy led,
Or hasty Choice, as many Women wed; 
But with delibrate Care, and ripend Thought,  
At Leisure first designd, before I wrought:  
On him I rested after long Debate,  
And not without considring, fixd my Fate:
His Flame was equal, though by mine inspird: 
(For so the Diffrence of our Birth requird:)  
Had he been born like me, like me his Love  
Had first begun, what mine was forcd to move:  
But thus beginning, thus we persevere;
Our Passions yet continue what they were, 
Nor length of Trial makes our Joys the less sincere.  
At this my Choice, though not by thine allowd, 
(Thy Judgment herding with the common Crowd)  
Thou takst unjust Offence; and, led by them,
Dost less the Merit than the Man esteem.  
Too sharply, Tancred, by thy Pride betrayd,  
Hast thou against the Laws of Kind inveighd; 
For all th Offence is in Opinion placd, 
Which deems high Birth by lowly Choice debasd.
This Thought alone with Fury fires thy Breast,  
(For Holy Marriage justifies the rest)  
That I have sunk the Glories of the State,  
And mixd my Blood with a Plebeian Mate:  
In which I wonder thou shouldst oversee
Superiour Causes, or impute to me 
The Fault of Fortune, or the Fates Decree.  
Or call it Heavns Imperial Powr alone,  
Which moves on Springs of Justice, though unknown;  
Yet this we see, though orderd for the best,
The Bad exalted, and the Good oppressd;  
Permitted Laurels grace the Lawless Brow, 
Th Unworthy raisd, the Worthy cast below. 
But leaving that: Search we the secret Springs, 
And backward trace the Principles of Things;
There shall we find, that when the World began, 
One common Mass composd the Mould of Man;  
One Paste of Flesh on all Degrees bestowd, 
And kneaded up alike with moistning Blood.  
The same Almighty Powr inspird the Frame
With kindld Life, and formd the Souls the same: 
The Faculties of Intellect, and Will, 
Dispensd with equal Hand, disposd with equal Skill, 
Like Liberty indulgd with Choice of Good or Ill. 
Thus born alike, from Vertue first began
The Diffrence that distinguishd Man from Man: 
He claimd no Title from Descent of Blood,  
But that which made him Noble, made him Good: 
Warmd with more Particles of Heavnly Flame, 
He wingd his upward Flight, and soard to Fame;
The rest remaind below, a Tribe without a Name.  
This Law, though Custom now diverts the Course, 
As Natures Institute, is yet in Force;  
Uncancelld, tho disusd: And he, whose Mind  
Is Vertuous, is alone of Noble Kind;
Though poor in Fortune, of Celestial Race;  
And he commits the Crime, who calls him Base. 
Now lay the Line; and measure all thy Court,  
By inward Vertue, not external Port,  
And find whom justly to prefer above
The Man on whom my Judgment placd my Love: 
So shalt thou see his Parts, and Person shine,  
And thus compard, the rest a base degenrate Line. 
Nor took I, when I first surveyd thy Court,  
His Valour or his Vertues on Report;
But trusted what I ought to trust alone,  
Relying on thy Eyes, and not my own;  
Thy Praise (and Thine was then the Publick Voice) 
First recommended Guiscard to my Choice:  
Directed thus by thee, I lookd, and found
A Man, I thought, deserving to be crowned!  
First by my Father pointed to my Sight, 
Nor less conspicuous by his Native Light: 
His Mind, his Meen, the Features of his Face, 
Excelling all the rest of Humane Race:
These were thy Thoughts, and thou couldst judge aright,  
Till Intrest made a Jaundice in thy Sight. 
Or shoud I grant thou didst not rightly see; 
Then thou wert first deceivd, and I deceivd by thee.  
But if thou shalt alledge, through Pride of Mind,
Thy Blood with one of base Condition joind,  
Tis false; for tis not Baseness to be Poor; 
His Poverty augments thy Crime the more;  
Upbraids thy Justice with the scant Regard  
Of Worth: Whom Princes praise, they shoud reward.
Are these the Kings entrusted by the Crowd  
With Wealth, to be dispensd for Common Good? 
The People sweat not for their Kings Delight,  
T enrich a Pimp, or raise a Parasite;  
Theirs is the Toil; and he who well has servd
His Country, has his Countrys Wealth deservd.  
Evn mighty Monarchs oft are meanly born, 
And Kings by Birth to lowest Rank return; 
All subject to the Powr of giddy Chance, 
For Fortune can depress, or can advance:
But true Nobility is of the Mind, 
Not givn by Chance, and not to Chance resignd.  
For the remaining Doubt of thy Decree,  
What to resolve, and how dispose of me, 
Be warnd to cast that useless Care aside,
My self alone will for my self provide. 
If in thy doting, and decrepit Age, 
Thy Soul, a Stranger in thy Youth to Rage,  
Begins in cruel Deeds to take Delight,  
Gorge with my Blood thy barbrous Appetite;
For I so little am disposd to pray 
For Life, I would not cast a Wish away. 
Such as it is, th Offence is all my own; 
And what to Guiscard is already done, 
Or to be done, is doomd by thy Decree,
That, if not executed first by thee,  
Shall on my Person be performd by me.  
Away, with Women weep, and leave me here, 
Fixd, like a Man to die, without a Tear; 
Or save, or slay us both this present Hour,
Tis all that Fate has left within thy Powr. 
She said: Nor did her Father fail to find,  
In all she spoke, the Greatness of her Mind;  
Yet thought she was not obstinate to die, 
Nor deemd the Death she promisd was so nigh:
Secure in this Belief, he left the Dame,  
Resolvd to spare her Life, and save her Shame; 
But that detested Object to remove, 
To wreak his Vengeance, and to cure her Love. 
Intent on this, a secret Order signd
The Death of Guiscard to his Guards enjoind: 
Strangling was chosen, and the Night the Time;  
A mute Revenge, and blind as was the Crime: 
His faithful Heart, a bloody Sacrifice, 
Torn from his Breast, to glut the Tyrants Eyes,
Closd the severe Command: For, (Slaves to pay) 
What Kings decree the Soldier must obey:  
Wagd against Foes, and, when the Wars are oer,  
Fit only to maintain Despotick Powr: 
Dangrous to Freedom, and desird alone
By Kings, who seek an Arbitrary Throne. 
Such were these Guards; as ready to have slain  
The Prince himself, allurd with greater gain:  
So was the Charge performd with better Will, 
By Men inurd to Blood, and exercisd in Ill.
Now, though the sullen Sire had easd his Mind, 
The Pomp of his Revenge was yet behind, 
A Pomp prepard to grace the Present he designd. 
A Goblet rich with Gems, and rough with Gold, 
Of Depth, and Breadth, the precious Pledge to hold,
With cruel Care he chose: The hollow Part 
Inclosd, the lid conceald the Lovers Heart:  
Then of his trusted Mischiefs one he sent,  
And bad him with these Words the Gift present:  
Thy Father sends thee this, to cheer thy Breast,
And glad thy Sight with what thou lovst the best,  
As thou hast pleasd his Eyes, and joyd his Mind,  
With what he lovd the most of Humane Kind. 
Eer this the Royal Dame, who well had weighd  
The Consequence of what her Sire had said,
Fixd on her Fate, against th expected Hour, 
Procurd the Means to have it in her Powr: 
For this she had distilld, with early Care,  
The Juice of Simples, friendly to Despair,  
A Magazine of Death; and thus prepard,
Secure to die, the fatal Message heard: 
Then smild severe; nor with a troubld Look, 
Or trembling hand, the Funral Present took;  
Evn kept her Countnance, when the Lid removd 
Disclosd the Heart, unfortunately lovd:
She needed not be told within whose Breast  
It lodgd; the Message had explaind the rest.  
Or not amazd, or hiding her Surprize,  
She sternly on the Bearer fixd her Eyes; 
Then thus; Tell Tancred, on his Daughters part,
The Gold, though precious, equals not the Heart:  
But he did well to give his best; and I,  
Who wishd a worthier Urn, forgive his Poverty. 
At this she curbd a Groan, that else had come, 
And pausing, viewd the Present in the Tomb:
Then to the Heart adord devoutly glewd  
Her Lips, and raising it, her Speech renewd: 
Evn from my Day of Birth, to this, the Bound 
Of my unhappy Being, I have found 
My Father s Care and Tenderness expressd:
But this last Act of Love excels the rest:  
For this so dear a Present, bear him back 
The best Return that I can live to make.  
The Messenger dispatchd, again she viewd  
The lovd Remains, and sighing, thus pursud:
Source of my Life, and Lord of my Desires,  
In whom I livd, with whom my Soul expires; 
Poor Heart, no more the Spring of Vital Heat, 
Cursd be the Hands that tore thee from thy Seat! 
The Course is finishd, which thy Fates decreed,
And thou, from thy Corporeal Prison freed:  
Soon hast thou reachd the Goal with mended Pace, 
A World of Woes dispatchd in little space: 
Forcd by thy Worth, thy Foe in Death become  
Thy Friend, has lodgd thee in a costly Tomb;
There yet remaind thy Funral Exequies,  
The weeping Tribute of thy Windows Eyes;  
And those, indulgent Heavn has found the way 
That I, before my Death, have leave to pay  
My Father evn in Cruelty is kind,
Or Heaven has turnd the Malice of his Mind 
To better Uses than his Hate designd;  
And made th Insult, which in his Gift appears, 
The Means to mourn thee with my pious Tears;  
Which I will pay thee down, before I go,
And save my self the Pains to weep below, 
If Souls can weep; though once I meant to meet  
My Fate with Face unmovd, and Eyes unwet,  
Yet since I have thee here in narrow Room,  
My Tears shall set thee first afloat within thy Tomb:
Then (as I know thy Spirit hovers nigh) 
Under thy friendly Conduct will I fly 
To Regions unexplord, secure to share  
Thy State; nor Hell shall Punishment appear;  
And Heavn is double Heavn, if thou art there.
She said: Her brim-full Eyes, that ready stood, 
And only wanted Will to weep a Flood, 
Releasd their watry Store, and pourd amain, 
Like Clouds low hung, a sober Showr of Rain; 
Mute solemn Sorrow, free from Female Noise,
Such as the Majesty of Grief destroys:  
For, bending oer the Cup, the Tears she shed 
Seemd by the Posture to discharge her Head,  
Oer-filld before; and oft (her Mouth applyd  
To the cold Heart) she kissd at once, and cryd.
Her Maids, who stood amazd, nor knew the Cause 
Of her Complaining, nor whose Heart it was; 
Yet all due Measures of her Mourning kept,  
Did Office at the Dirge, and by Infection wept; 
And oft enquird th Occasion of her Grief,
(Unanswerd but by Sighs) and offerd vain Relief.  
At length, her Stock of Tears already shed, 
She wipd her Eyes, she raisd her drooping Head, 
And thus pursud: O ever faithful Heart,  
I have performd the Ceremonial Part,
The Decencies of Grief; It rests behind,  
That, as our Bodies were, our Souls be joind:  
To thy whateer abode, my Shade convey, 
And as an elder Ghost, direct the way.  
She said; and bad the Vial to be brought,
Where she before had brewd the deadly Draught: 
First pouring out the med cinable Bane,  
The Heart, her Tears had rinsd, she bathd again;  
Then down her Throat the Death securely throws, 
And quaffs a long Oblivion of her Woes.
This done, she mounts the Genial Bed, and there,  
(Her Body first composd with honest Care,) 
Attends the welcom Rest; Her Hands yet hold 
Close to her Heart, the Monumental Gold;  
Nor farther Word she spoke, but closd her Sight,
And quiet, sought the Covert of the Night.  
The Damsels, who the while in Silence mournd,  
Not knowing, nor suspecting Death subornd, 
Yet, as their Duty was, to Tancred sent,  
Who, conscious of th Occasion, feard th Event.
Alarmd, and with presaging Heart he came 
And drew the Curtains, and exposd the Dame 
To loathsom Light; then with a late Relief  
Made vain Efforts to mitigate her Grief.  
She, what she could, excluding Day, her Eyes
Kept firmly seald, and sternly thus replies: 
Tancred, restrain thy Tears unsought by me, 
And Sorrow, unavailing now to thee: 
Did ever Man before afflict his Mind, 
To see th Effect of what himself designd?
Yet, if thou hast remaining in thy Heart  
Some Sense of Love, some unextinguishd Part  
Of former Kindness, largely once professd, 
Let me by that adjure thy hardend Breast,  
Not to deny thy Daughters last Request:
The secret Love which I so long enjoyd,  
And still conceald, to gratifie thy Pride, 
Thou hast disjoind; but, with my dying Breath, 
Seek not, I beg thee, to disjoin our Death: 
Where-eer his Corps by thy Command is laid,
Thither let mine in publick be conveyd;  
Exposd in open View, and Side by Side, 
Acknowlegd as a Bridegroom and a Bride.  
The Princes Anguish hinderd his Reply:  
And she, who felt her Fate approaching nigh,
Seizd the cold Heart, and heaving to her Breast, 
Here, precious Pledge, she said, securely rest. 
These Accents were her last; the creeping Death 
Benumd her Senses first, then stoppd her Breath.  
Thus she for Disobedience justly dyd;
The Sire was justly punishd for his Pride; 
The Youth, least guilty, sufferd for th Offence 
Of Duty violated to his Prince; 
Who late repenting of his cruel Deed, 
One common Sepulcher for both decreed;
Intombd the wretched Pair in Royal State,  
And on their Monument inscribd their Fate.

**
Theodore and Honoria
***

OF all the Cities in Romanian Lands,  
The chief, and most renownd Ravenna stands:  
Adornd in ancient Times with Arms and Arts,  
And rich Inhabitants, with generous Hearts. 
But Theodore the Brave, above the rest,
With Gifts of Fortune, and of Nature blessd, 
The foremost Place, for Wealth and Honour held, 
And all in Feats of Chivalry excelld.  
This noble Youth to Madness lovd a Dame, 
Of high Degree, Honoria was her Name;
Fair as the Fairest, but of haughty Mind, 
And fiercer than became so soft a kind; 
Proud of her Birth; (for equal she had none;) 
The rest she scornd; but hated him alone.  
His Gifts, his constant Courtship, nothing gaind;
For she, the more he lovd, the more disdaind: 
He livd with all the Pomp he coud devise, 
At Tilts and Turnaments obtaind the Prize, 
But found no favour in his Ladies Eyes: 
Relentless as a Rock, the lofty Maid
Turnd all to Poyson that he did, or said:  
Nor Prayrs, nor Tears, nor offerd Vows could move;  
The Work went backward; and the more he strove  
T advance his Sute, the farther from her Love. 
Wearyd at length, and wanting Remedy,
He doubted oft, and oft resolvd to die.  
But Pride stood ready to prevent the Blow,  
For who would die to gratify a Foe? 
His generous Mind disdaind so mean a Fate; 
That passd, his next Endeavour was to Hate.
But vainer that Relief than all the rest; 
The less he hopd, with more Desire possessed;  
Love stood the Siege, and would not yield his Breast. 
Change was the next, but change deceivd his Care,  
He sought a Fairer, but found none so Fair.
He would have worn her out by slow degrees, 
As Men by Fasting starve th untamd Disease: 
But present Love requird a present Ease. 
Looking he feeds alone his famishd Eyes, 
Feeds lingring Death, but, looking not, he dies.
Yet still he chose the longest way to Fate, 
Wasting at once his Life, and his Estate. 
His Friends beheld, and pityd him in vain, 
For what Advice can ease a Lovers Pain!  
Absence, the best Expedient they could find
Might save the Fortune, if not cure the Mind: 
This Means they long proposd, but little gaind, 
Yet after much pursuit, at length obtaind. 
Hard, you may think it was, to give consent,  
But, struggling with his own Desires, he went;
With large Expence, and with a pompous Train, 
Provided, as to visit France or Spain,  
Or for some distant Voyage oer the Main. 
But Love had clippd his Wings, and cut him short,  
Confind within the purlieus of his Court:
Three Miles he went, nor farther could retreat; 
His Travels ended at his Country-Seat:  
To Chassis pleasing Plains he took his way, 
There pitchd his Tents, and there resolvd to stay.  
The Spring was in the Prime; the neighbring Grove
Supplyd with Birds, the Choristers of Love:  
Musick unbought, that ministerd Delight  
To Morning-walks, and lulld his Cares by Night:  
There he dischargd his Friends; but not th Expence  
Of frequent Treats, and proud Magnificence.
He livd as Kings retire, though more at large, 
From publick Business, yet with equal Charge; 
With House, and Heart still open to receive;  
As well content, as Love would give him leave:  
He would have livd more free; but many a Guest,
Who could forsake the Friend, pursud the Feast.  
It happd one Morning, as his Fancy led,  
Before his usual Hour, he left his Bed; 
To walk within a lonely Lawn, that stood  
On evry side surrounded by the Wood:
Alone he walkd, to please his pensive Mind,  
And sought the deepest Solitude to find:  
Twas in a Grove of spreading Pines he strayd, 
The Winds, within the quivring Branches plaid, 
And Dancing-Trees a mournful Musick made.
The Place it self was suiting to his Care,  
Uncouth and Salvage as the cruel Fair.  
He wanderd on, unknowing where he went,  
Lost in the Wood, and all on Love intent: 
The Day already half his Race had run,
And summond him to due Repast at Noon, 
But Love could feel no Hunger but his own.  
While listning to the murmring Leaves he stood, 
More than a Mile immersd within the Wood,  
At once the Wind was laid; the whispring sound
Was dumb; a rising Earthquake rockd the Ground:  
With deeper Brown the Grove was overspred,  
A sudden Horror seizd his giddy Head,  
And his Ears tinckled, and his Colour fled. 
Nature was in alarm; some Danger nigh
Seemd threatend, though unseen to mortal Eye: 
Unusd to fear, he summond all his Soul, 
And stood collected in himself, and whole:  
Not long: For soon a Whirlwind rose around, 
And from afar he heard a screaming sound,
As of a Dame distressd, who, cryd for Aid,  
And filld with loud Laments the secret Shade.  
A Thicket close beside the Grove there stood, 
With Breers and Brambles choakd, and dwarfish Wood:  
From thence the Noise: Which now approaching near
With more distinguishd Notes invades his Ear:  
He raisd his Head, and saw a beauteous Maid, 
With Hair dishevelld issuing through the Shade;  
Strippd of her Cloaths, and een those Parts reveald  
Which modest Nature keeps from Sight conceald
Her Face, her Hands, her naked Limbs were torn, 
With passing through the Brakes, and prickly Thorn: 
Two Mastiffs gaunt and grim, her Flight pursud,  
And oft their fastend Fangs in Blood embrud:  
Oft they came up, and pinchd her tender Side,
Mercy, O Mercy, Heavn, she ran, and cryd; 
When Heavn was namd, they loosd their Hold again 
Then sprung she forth, they followd her amain. 
Not far behind, a Knight of swarthy Face, 
High on a Coal-black Steed pursud the Chace;
With flashing Flames his ardent Eyes were filld, 
And in his Hands a naked Sword he held: 
He cheard the Dogs to follow her who fled, 
And vowd Revenge on her devoted Head.  
As Theodore was born of noble Kind,
The Brutal Action rowzd his manly Mind:  
Movd with unworthy Usage of the Maid,  
He, though unarmd, resolvd to give her Aid. 
A Saplin Pine he wrenchd from out the Ground,  
The readiest Weapon that his Fury found.
Thus, furnishd for Offence, he crossd the way 
Betwixt the graceless Villain, and his Prey.  
The Knight came thundring on, but from afar  
Thus in imperious Tone forbad the War:  
Cease, Theodore, to proffer vain Relief,
Nor stop the vengeance of so just a Grief;  
But give me leave to seize my destind Prey,  
And let eternal Justice take the way: 
I but revenge my Fate; disdaind, betrayd, 
And suffring Death for this ungrateful Maid.
He sayd, at once dismounting from the Steed; 
For now the Hell-hounds with superiour Speed  
Had reachd the Dame, and fastning on her Side,  
The Ground with issuing Streams of Purple dyd. 
Stood Theodore Surprizd in deadly Fright,
With chattring Teeth, and bristling Hair upright;  
Yet armd with inborn Worth, What eer said he, 
Thou art, who knowst me better than I thee;  
Or prove thy rightful Cause, or be defyd.  
The Spectre, fiercely staring, thus replyd.
Know, Theodore, thy Ancestry I claim, 
And Guido Cavalcanti was my Name. 
One common Sire our Fathers did beget,  
My Name and Story some remember yet:  
Thee, then a Boy, within my Arms I laid,
When for my Sins I lovd this haughty Maid; 
Not less adord in Life, nor servd by Me,  
Than proud Honoria now is lovd by Thee.  
What did I not her stubborn Heart to gain?  
But all my Vows were answerd with Disdain;
She scornd my Sorrows, and despisd my Pain. 
Long time I draggd my Days in fruitless Care,  
Then loathing Life, and plungd in deep Despair,  
To finish my unhappy Life, I fell 
On this sharp Sword, and now am damnd in Hell.
Short was her Joy; for soon th insulting Maid  
By Heavns Decree in the cold Grave was laid,  
And as in unrepenting Sin she dyd, 
Doomd to the same bad Place, is punishd for her Pride;  
Because she deemd I well deservd to die,
And made a Merit of her Cruelty.  
There, then, we met; both tryd, and both were cast,  
And this irrevocable Sentence passd; 
That she whom I so long pursud in vain,  
Should suffer from my Hands a lingring Pain:
Renewd to Life, that she might daily die,  
I daily doomd to follow, she to fly; 
No more a Lover but a mortal Foe, 
I seek her Life (for Love is none below:) 
As often as my Dogs with better speed
Arrest her Flight, is she to Death decreed: 
Then with this fatal Sword on which I dyd, 
I pierce her opend Back or tender Side,  
And tear that hardend Heart from out her Breast, 
Which, with her Entrails, makes my hungry Hounds a Feast.
Nor lies she long, but as her Fates ordain, 
Springs up to Life, and fresh to second Pain, 
Is savd to Day, to Morrow to be slain. 
This, versd in Death, th infernal Knight relates, 
And then for Proof fulfilld their common Fates;
Her Heart and Bowels through her Back he drew,  
And fed the Hounds that helpd him to pursue. 
Stern lookd the Fiend, as frustrate of his Will, 
Not half sufficd, and greedy yet to kill.  
And now the Soul expiring through the Wound,
Had left the Body breathless on the Ground, 
When thus the grisly Spectre spoke again: 
Behold the Fruit of ill-rewarded Pain:  
As many Months as I sustaind her Hate, 
So many Years is she condemnd by Fate
To daily Death; and evry several Place,  
Conscious of her Disdain, and my Disgrace,  
Must witness her just Punishment; and be  
A Scene of Triumph and Revenge to me. 
As in this Grove I took my last Farewel,
As on this very spot of Earth I fell, 
As Friday saw me die, so she my Prey  
Becomes evn here, on this revolving Day. 
Thus while he spoke, the Virgin from the Ground 
Upstarted fresh, already closd the Wound,
And unconcernd for all she felt before,  
Precipitates her Flight along the Shore:  
The Hell-hounds, as ungorgd with Flesh and Blood 
Pursue their Prey, and seek their wonted Food:  
The Fiend remounts his Courser; mends his Pace,
And all the Vision vanishd from the Place. 
Long stood the noble Youth oppressd with Awe 
And stupid at the wondrous Things he saw 
Surpassing common Faith; transgressing Natures Law.  
He would have been asleep, and wishd to wake.
But Dreams, he knew, no long Impression make, 
Though strong at first: If Vision, to what end, 
But such as must his future State portend?  
His Love the Damsel, and himself the Fiend. 
But yet reflecting that it could not be
From Heavn, which cannot impious Acts decree,  
Resolvd within him self to shun the Snare  
Which hell for his Distruction did prepare; 
And as his better Genius should direct  
From an ill Cause to draw a good effect.
Inspird from Heavn he homeward took his way,  
Nor palld his new Design with long delay;  
But of his Train a trusty Servant sent, 
To call his Friends together at his Tent. 
They came, and usual Salutations paid,
With Words premeditated thus he said: 
What you have often counselld, to remove 
My vain pursuit of unregarded Love; 
By Thrift my sinking Fortune to repair, 
Tho late, yet is at last become my Care:
My Heart shall be my own; my vast Expence 
Reducd to bounds, by timely Providence:  
This only I require; invite for me  
Honoria, with her Fathers Family,  
Her Friends, and mine; the Cause I shall display,
On Friday next, for thats th appointed Day. 
Well pleasd were all his Friends, the Task was light;  
The Father, Mother, Daughter they invite  
Hardly the Dame was drawn to this repast; 
But yet resolvd, because it was the last.
The Day was come; the Guests invited came,  
And, with the rest, th inexorable Dame:  
A Feast prepard with riotous Expence,  
Much Cost, more Care, and most Magnificence.  
The Place ordaind was in that haunted Grove
Where the revenging Ghost pursud his Love: 
The Tables in a proud Pavilion spread,  
With Flowrs below, and Tissue overhead:  
The rest in rank; Honoria chief in place  
Was artfully contrivd to set her Face
To front the Thicket and behold the Chace.  
The Feast was servd; the time so well forecast,  
That just when the Dessert, and Fruits were placd, 
The Fiends Alarm began; the hollow sound 
Sung in the Leaves, the Forest shook around,
Air blackend; rowld the Thunder; groand the ground.  
Nor long before the loud Laments arise, 
Of one distressd, and Mastiffs mingled Cries;  
And first the Dame came rushing through the Wood, 
And next the famishd Hounds that sought their Food
And gripd her Flanks, and oft essayd their Jaws in Blood. 
Last came the Fellon on the Sable Steed,  
Armd with his naked Sword, and urgd his Dogs to speed:  
She ran, and cryd; her Flight directly bent, 
(A Guest unbidden) to the fatal Tent,
The Scene of Death, and Place ordaind for Punishment.  
Loud was the Noise, aghast was every Guest, 
The Women shriekd, the Men forsook the Feast;  
The Hounds at nearer distance hoarsely bayd; 
The Hunter close pursud the visionary Maid,
She rent the Heavn with loud Laments, imploring Aid. 
The Gallants, to protect the Ladies right,  
Their Fauchions brandishd at the grisly Spright; 
High on his Stirups, he provokd the Fight. 
Then on the Crowd he cast a furious Look,
And witherd all their Strength before he strook: 
Back on your Lives; let be, said he, my Prey, 
And let my Vengeance take the destind way. 
Vain are your Arms, and vainer your Defence,  
Against th eternal Doom of Providence:
Mine is th ungrateful Maid by Heavn designd: 
Mercy she would not give, nor Mercy shall she find. 
At this the former Tale again he told 
With thundring Tone, and dreadful to behold: 
Sunk were their Hearts with Horror of the Crime,
Nor needed to be warnd a second time,  
But bore each other back; some knew the Face, 
And all had heard the much lamented Case  
Of him who fell for Love, and this the fatal Place. 
And now th infernal Minister advancd,
Seizd the due Victim, and with Fury lanchd  
Her Back, and piercing through her inmost Heart,  
Drew backward, as before, th offending part. 
The reeking Entrails next he tore away, 
And to his meagre Mastiffs made a Prey:
The pale Assistants on each other stard, 
With gaping Mouths for issuing Words prepard;  
The still-born sounds upon the Palate hung, 
And dyd imperfect on the faltring Tongue.  
The Fright was general; but the Female Band
(A helpless Train) in more Confusion stand; 
With horror shuddring, on a heap they run,  
Sick at the sight of hateful Justice done;  
For Conscience rung th Alarm, and made the Case their own. 
So spread upon a Lake, with upward Eye,
A plump of Fowl behold their Foe on high; 
They close their trembling Troop; and all attend  
On whom the sowsing Eagle will descend. 
But most the proud Honoria feard th Event,  
And thought to her alone the Vision sent.
Her Guilt presents to her distracted Mind 
Heavns Justice, Theodores revengeful Kind, 
And the same Fate to the same Sin assignd; 
Already sees her self the Monsters Prey, 
And feels her Heart, and Entrails torn away.
Twas a mute Scene of Sorrow, mixd with fear;  
Still on the Table lay th unfinished Cheer;  
The Knight, and hungry Mastiffs stood around, 
The mangled Dame lay breathless on the Ground;  
When on a suddain reinspired with Breath,
Again she rose, again to suffer Death;  
Nor stayd the Hell-hounds, nor the Hunter stayd,  
But followd, as before, the flying Maid: 
Th Avenger took from Earth th avenging Sword, 
And mounting light as Air, his Sable Steed he spurrd:
The Clouds dispelld, the Sky resumd her Light,  
And Nature stood recoverd of her Fright. 
But Fear, the last of Ills, remaind behind,  
And Horror heavy sat on evry Mind. 
Nor Theodore incouragd more his Feast,
But sternly lookd, as hatching in his Breast 
Some deep Design, which when Honoria viewd 
The fresh Impulse her former Fright renewd:  
She thought her self the trembling Dame who fled, 
And him the grisly Ghost that spurrd th infernal Steed:
The more dismayd, for when the Guests withdrew,  
Their courteous Host saluting all the Crew  
Regardless passed her oer; nor gracd with kind adieu. 
That sting infixd within her haughty Mind, 
The downfal of her Empire she divind;
And her proud Heart with secret Sorrow pind. 
Home as they went, the sad Discourse renewd  
Of the relentless Dame to Death pursud,  
And of the Sight obscene so lately viewd;  
None durst arraign the righteous Doom she bore,
Evn they who pityd most yet blamd her more:  
The Parallel they needed not to name, 
But in the Dead they damnd the living Dame.  
At evry little Noise she lookd behind,  
For still the Knight was present to her Mind:
And anxious oft she started on the way, 
And thought the Horseman-Ghost came thundring for his Prey. 
Returnd, she took her Bed with little Rest,  
But in short Slumbers dreamt the Funeral Feast: 
Awakd, she turned her Side; and slept again,
The same black Vapors mounted in her Brain, 
And the same Dreams returnd with double Pain.  
Now forcd to wake because afraid to sleep  
Her Blood all Feverd, with a furious Leap  
She sprung from Bed, distracted in her Mind,
And feard, at evry Step, a twitching Spright behind.  
Darkling and desprate, with a staggring pace, 
Of Death afraid, and conscious of Disgrace; 
Fear, Pride, Remorse, at once her Heart assaild, 
Pride put Remorse to flight, but Fear prevaild,
Friday, the fatal Day, when next it came, 
Her Soul forethought the Fiend would change his Game, 
And her pursue, or Theodore be slain, 
And two Ghosts join their Packs to hunt her oer the Plain. 
This dreadful Image so possessd her Mind,
That, desprate any Succour else to find, 
She ceasd all farther Hope; and now began  
To make reflection on th unhappy Man.  
Rich, Brave, and Young, who past expression lovd,  
Proof to Disdain; and not to be removd:
Of all the Men respected, and admird,  
Of all the Dames, except her self, desird: 
Why not of her? Preferrd above the rest  
By him with Knightly Deeds, and open Love professd?  
So had another been; where he his Vows addressd.
This quelld her Pride, yet other Doubts remaind,  
That once disdaining she might be disdaind:  
The Fear was just, but greater Fear prevaild,  
Fear of her Life by hellish Hounds assaild:  
He took a lowring leave; but who can tell
What outward Hate might inward Love conceal?  
Her Sexes Arts she knew, and why not then 
Might deep dissembling have a place in Men? 
Here Hope began to dawn; resolvd to try, 
She fixd on this her utmost Remedy;
Death was behind, but hard it was to die. 
Twas time enough at last on Death to call; 
The Precipice in sight, a Shrub was all,  
That kindly stood betwixt to break the fatal fall.  
One Maid she had, belovd above the rest:
Secure of her, the Secret she confessd:  
And now the chearful Light her Fears dispelld, 
She with no winding turns the Truth conceald,  
But put the Woman off, and stood reveald:  
With Faults confessd commissiond her to go,
If Pity yet had place, and reconcile her Foe. 
The welcom Message made, was soon receivd; 
Twas what he wishd, and hopd, but scarce believd; 
Fate seemd a fair occasion to present, 
He knew the Sex, and feard she might repent,
Should he delay the moment of Consent.  
There yet remaind to gain her Friends (a Care  
The modesty of Maidens well might spare;) 
But she with such a Zeal the Cause embracd,  
(As Women where they will, are all in hast,)
That Father, Mother, and the Kin beside,  
Were overborn by Fury of the Tide:  
With full consent of all, she changd her State,  
Resistless in her Love, as in her Hate. 
By her Example warnd, the rest beware;
More Easy, less Imperious, were the Fair; 
And that one Hunting which the Devil designd,  
For one fair Female, lost him half the Kind.

**
Cymon and Iphigenia
***

OLD as I am, for Ladies Love unfit, 
The Powr of Beauty I remember yet, 
Which once inflamd my Soul, and still inspires my Wit. 
If Love be Folly, the severe Divine 
Has felt that Folly, tho he censures mine;
Pollutes the Pleasures of a chast Embrace,  
Acts what I write, and propagates in Grace  
With riotous Excess, a Priestly Race: 
Suppose him free, and that I forge th offence, 
He shewd the way, perverting first my Sense:
In Malice witty, and with Venom fraught,  
He makes me speak the Things I never thought. 
Compute the Gains of his ungovernd Zeal; 
Ill sutes his Cloth the Praise of Railing well! 
The World will think that what we loosly write,
Tho now arraignd, he read with some delight;  
Because he seems to chew the Cud again, 
When his broad Comment makes the Text too plain,  
And teaches more in one explaining Page,  
Than all the double Meanings of the Stage.
What needs he Paraphrase on what we mean? 
We were at worst but Wanton; hes Obscene.  
I, nor my fellows, nor my Self excuse;  
But Loves the Subject of the Comick Muse:  
Nor can we write without it, nor would you
A Tale of only dry Instruction view;  
Nor Love is always of a vicious Kind, 
But oft to virtuous Acts inflames the Mind, 
Awakes the sleepy Vigour of the Soul, 
And, brushing oer, adds Motion to the Pool.
Love, studious how to please, improves our Parts, 
With polishd Manners, and adorns with Arts.  
Love first invented Verse, and formd the Rhime,  
The Motion measurd, harmonizd the Chime;  
To libral Acts inlargd the narrow-Sould,
Softend the Fierce, and made the Coward Bold:  
The World when wast, he Peopled with increase,  
And warring Nations reconcild in Peace.  
Ormond, the first, and all the Fair may find  
In this one Legend to their Fame designd,
When Beauty fires the Blood, how Love exalts the Mind.  
IN that sweet Isle, where Venus keeps her Court,  
And evry Grace, and all the Loves resort;  
Where either Sex is formd of softer Earth, 
And takes the bent of Pleasure from their Birth;
There livd a Cyprian Lord, above the rest  
Wise, Wealthy, with a numrous Issue blest. 
But as no Gift of Fortune is sincere, 
Was only wanting in a worthy Heir:  
His eldest Born a goodly youth to view
Excelld the rest in Shape, and outward Shew; 
Fair, Tall, his Limbs with due Proportion joind, 
But of a heavy, dull, degenerate Mind.  
His Soul belyd the Features of his Face; 
Beauty was there, but Beauty in disgrace.
A clownish Mien, a Voice with rustick sound,  
And stupid Eyes, that ever lovd the Ground.  
He looked like Natures Error; as the Mind  
And Body were not of a Piece designd,  
But made for two, and by mistake in one were joind.
The ruling Rod, the Fathers forming Care,  
Were exercisd in vain, on Wits despair; 
The more informd the less he understood, 
And deeper sunk by floundring in the Mud.  
Now scornd of all, and grown the publick Shame,
The people from Galesus changed his name, 
And Cymon calld, which signifies a Brute;  
So well his Name did with his Nature sute.  
His Father, when he found his Labour lost,  
And Care employd that answerd not the Cost,
Chose an ungrateful Object to remove, 
And loathd to see what Nature made him love; 
So to his Country-Farm the Fool confind: 
Rude Work well suted with a rustick Mind. 
Thus to the Wilds the sturdy Cymon went,
A Squire among the Swains, and pleasd with Banishment. 
His Corn, and Cattle, were his only Care, 
And his supreme Delight a Country-Fair. 
It happend on a Summers Holiday, 
That to the Greenwood-shade he took his way;
For Cymon shunnd the Church, and usd not much to Pray.  
His Quarter Staff, which he coud neer forsake,  
Hung half before, and half behind his Back. 
He trudgd along unknowing what he sought,  
And whistled as he went, for want of Thought.
By Chance conducted, or by Thirst constraind,  
The deep Recesses of the Grove he gaind; 
Where, in a Plain, defended by the Wood,  
Crept through the matted Grass a Chrystal Flood,  
By which an Alabaster Fountain stood:
And on the Margin of the Fount was laid 
(Attended by her Slaves) a sleeping Maid  
Like Dian and her Nymphs, when, tird with Sport, 
To rest by cool Eurotas they resort:  
The Dame herself the Goddess well expressd,
Not more distinguishd by her Purple Vest,  
Than by the charming Features of her Face,  
And evn in Slumber a superiour Grace:  
Her comely Limbs composd with decent Care, 
Her Body shaded with a slight Cymarr;
Her Bosom to the view was only bare:  
Where two beginning Paps were scarcely spyd  
For yet their Places were but signifyd:  
The fanning Wind upon her Bosom blows,  
To meet the fanning Wind the Bosom rose;
The fanning Wind, and purling Streams continue her repose.  
The Fool of Nature, stood with stupid Eyes  
And gaping Mouth, that testifyd Surprize,  
Fixd on her Face, nor coud remove his Sight,  
New as he was to Love, and Novice in Delight:
Long mute he stood, and leaning on his Staff, 
His Wonder witnessd with an Ideot laugh; 
Then would have spoke, but by his glimmering Sense  
First found his want of Words, and feard Offence:  
Doubted for what he was he should be known,
By his Clown-Accent and his Country-Tone. 
Through the rude Chaos thus the running Light 
Shot the first Ray that piercd the Native Night: 
Then Day and Darkness in the Mass were mixd, 
Till gatherd in a Globe, the Beams were fixd:
Last shon the Sun who, radiant in his Sphere  
Illumind Heavn, and Earth, and rowld around the Year.  
So Reason in this Brutal Soul began:  
Love made him first suspect he was a Man; 
Love made him doubt his broad barbarian Sound;
By Love his want of Words and Wit he found; 
That sense of want prepard the future way  
To Knowledge, and disclosd the promise of a Day. 
What not his Fathers Care, nor Tutors Art 
Coud plant with Pains in his unpolishd Heart,
The best Instructor Love at once inspird,  
As barren Grounds to Fruitfulness are fird;  
Love taught him Shame, and Shame with Love at Strife  
Soon taught the sweet Civilities of Life; 
His gross material Soul at once could find
Somewhat in her excelling all her Kind: 
Exciting a Desire till then unknown,  
Somewhat unfound, or found in her alone.  
This made the first Impression in his Mind, 
Above, but just above, the Brutal Kind.
For Beasts can like, but not distinguish too  
Nor their own liking by reflection know;  
Nor why they like or this, or tother Face, 
Or judge of this or that peculiar Grace;  
But love in gross, and stupidly admire;
As Flies allurd by Light, approach the Fire. 
Thus our Man-Beast advancing by degrees 
First likes the whole, then seprates what he sees; 
On sevral Parts a sevral Praise bestows,  
The ruby Lips, the well-proportiond Nose,
The snowy Skin, in Raven-glossy Hair, 
The dimpled Cheek, the Forehead rising fair,  
And evn in Sleep it self a smiling Air.  
From thence his Eyes descending viewd the rest,  
Her plump round Arms, white Hands, and heaving Breast.
Long on the last he dwelt, though evry part  
A pointed Arrow sped to pierce his Heart. 
Thus in a trice a Judge of Beauty grown,  
(A Judge erected from a Country-Clown)  
He longd to see her Eyes in Slumber hid,
And wishd his own coud pierce within the Lid: 
He woud have wakd her, but restraind his Thought,  
And Love new-born the first good Manners taught.  
An awful Fear his ardent Wish withstood,  
Nor durst disturb the Goddess of the Wood;
For such she seemd by her celestial Face,  
Excelling all the rest of human Race: 
And Things divine, by common Sense he knew, 
Must be devoutly seen at distant view:  
So checking his Desire, with trembling Heart
Gazing he stood, nor would, nor could depart; 
Fixd as a Pilgrim wilderd in his way, 
Who dares not stir by Night for fear to stray;  
But stands with awful Eyes to watch the dawn of Day.  
At length awaking, Iphigene the fair
(So was the Beauty calld who causd his Care)  
Unclosd her eyes, and double Day reveald, 
While those of all her Slaves in Sleep were seald. 
The slavering Cudden, propd upon his Staff,  
Stood ready gaping with a grinning Laugh,
To welcome her awake, nor durst begin 
To speak, but wisely kept the Fool within.  
Then she: What make you Cymon here alone? 
(For Cymons name was round the Country known,  
Because descended of a noble Race,
And for a Soul ill sorted with his Face.) 
But still the Sot stood silent with Surprize, 
With fixd regard on her new opend Eyes, 
And in his Breast receivd th invenomd Dart,  
A tickling Pain that pleasd amid the Smart.
But conscious of her Form, with quick distrust  
She saw his sparkling Eyes, and feard his brutal Lust: 
This to prevent, she wakd her sleepy Crew, 
And rising hasty took a short Adieu.  
Then Cymon first his rustick Voice essayd,
With profferd Service to the parting Maid  
To see her safe; his Hand she long denyd,  
But took at length, ashamd of such a Guide.  
So Cymon led her home, and leaving there, 
No more woud to his Country Clowns repair,
But sought his Fathers House, with better Mind,  
Refusing in the Farm to be confind.  
The Father wonderd at the Sons return,  
And knew not whether to rejoice or mourn; 
But doubtfully receivd, expecting still
To learn the secret Causes of his alterd Will. 
Nor was he long delayd: the first Request  
He made, was, like his Brothers to be dressd,  
And, as his Birth requird, above the rest. 
With ease his Sute was granted by his Syre,
Distinguishing his Heir by rich Attire: 
His Body thus adornd, he next designd 
With libral Arts to cultivate his Mind;  
He sought a Tutor of his own accord,  
And studyd Lessons he before abhorrd.
Thus the Man-Child advancd, and learned so fast, 
That in short time his Equals he surpassd: 
His brutal Manners from his Breast exild,  
His Mien he fashiond, and his Tongue he fild; 
In evry Exercise of all admird,
He seemd, nor only seemd but was inspird:  
Inspird by Love, whose Business is to please;  
He Rode, he Fencd, he moved with graceful Ease,  
More famd for Sense, for courtly Carriage more,  
Than for his brutal Folly known before.
What then of alterd Cymon shall we say,  
But that the Fire which choakd in Ashes lay, 
A Load too heavy for his Soul to move,  
Was upward blown below, and brushd away by Love? 
Love made an active Progress through his Mind,
The dusky Parts he cleard, the gross refind;  
The drowsy wakd; and as he went impressd  
The Makers Image on the human Beast. 
Thus was the Man amended by Desire, 
And, tho he lovd perhaps with too much Fire,
His Father all his Faults with Reason scand, 
And likd an error of the better Hand;  
Excusd th excess of Passion in his Mind,  
By Flames too fierce, perhaps too much refind: 
So Cymon, since his Sire indulgd his Will,
Impetuous lovd, and would be Cymon still;  
Galesus he disownd, and chose to bear  
The Name of Fool confirmd, and Bishopd by the Fair. 
To Cipseus by his Friends his Sute he movd,  
Cipseus the Father of the Fair he lovd:
But he was pre-ingagd by former Ties,  
While Cymon was endeavring to be wise  
And Iphigene, obligd by former Vows, 
Had givn her Faith to wed a Foreign Spouse:  
Her Sire and She to Rhodian Pasimond,
Tho both repenting, were by Promise bound, 
Nor could retract; and thus, as Fate decreed, 
Tho better lovd, he spoke too late to speed.  
The Doom was past, the Ship already sent  
Did all his tardy Diligence prevent:
Sighd to her self the fair unhappy Maid, 
While stormy Cymon thus in secret said: 
The time is come for Iphigene to find 
The Miracle she wrought upon my Mind: 
Her Charms have made me Man, her ravishd Love
In rank shall place me with the Blessd above.  
For mine by Love, by Force she shall be mine, 
Or Death, if Force should fail, shall finish my Design. 
Resolvd he said: And riggd with speedy Care 
A Vessel strong, and well equippd for War.
The secret Ship with chosen Friends he stord,  
And bent to die, or conquer, went aboard. 
Ambushd he lay behind the Cyprian Shore, 
Waiting the Sail that all his Wishes bore;  
Nor long expected, for the following Tide
Sent out the hostile Ship and beauteous Bride.  
To Rhodes the Rival Bark directly steerd,  
When Cymon sudden at her Back appeard, 
And stopd her Flight: Then standing on his Prow  
In haughty Terms he thus defyd the Foe:
Or strike your Sails at Summons, or prepare 
To prove the last Extremities of War. 
Thus warnd, the Rhodians for the Fight provide;  
Already were the Vessels Side by Side,  
These obstinate to save, and those to seize the Bride.
But Cymon soon his crooked Grapples cast, 
Which with tenacious hold his Foes embracd.  
And armd with Sword and Shield, amid the Press he passd.  
Fierce was the Fight, but hastning to his Prey,  
By force the furious Lover freed his way:
Himself alone dispersd the Rhodian Crew, 
The Weak disdaind, the Valiant overthrew;  
Cheap Conquest for his following Friends remaind,  
He reapd the Field, and they but only gleand. 
His Victory confessd, the Foes retreat,
And cast their Weapons at the Victors Feet.  
Whom thus he cheard: O Rhodian Youth, I fought 
For Love alone, nor other Booty sought; 
Your Lives are safe; your Vessel I resign.  
Yours be your own, restoring what is mine:
In Iphigene I claim my rightful Due,  
Robd by my Rival, and detaind by you: 
Your Pasimond a lawless Bargain drove,  
The Parent could not sell the Daughters Love; 
Or if he coud, my Love disdains the Laws,
And like a King by Conquest gains his Cause;  
Where Arms take place, all other Pleas are vain;  
Love taught me Force, and Force shall Love maintain.  
You, what by Strength you could not keep, release,  
And at an easy Ransom buy your Peace.
Fear on the conquerd Side soon signd th Accord,  
And Iphigene to Cymon was restord: 
While to his Arms the blushing Bride he took, 
To seeming Sadness she composd her Look; 
As if by Force subjected to his Will,
Tho pleasd, dissembling, and a Woman still. 
And, for she wept, he wipd her falling Tears,  
And prayd her to dismiss her empty Fears;  
For yours I am, he said, and have deservd  
Your Love much better, whom so long I servd,
Than he to whom your formal Father tyd 
Your Vows; and sold a Slave, not sent a Bride.  
Thus while he spoke, he seizd the willing Prey,  
As Paris bore the Spartan Spouse away:  
Faintly she screamd, and evn her Eyes confessd
She rather would be thought, than was distressd. 
Who now exults but Cymon in his Mind? 
Vain hopes and empty Joys of human Kind,  
Proud of the present, to the future blind!  
Secure of Fate, while Cymon plows the Sea,
And steers to Candy with his conquerd Prey,  
Scarce the third Glass of measurd Hours was run, 
When like a fiery Meteor sunk the Sun,  
The Promise of a Storm; the shifting Gales  
Forsake by Fits and fill the flagging Sails:
Hoarse Murmurs of the Main from far were heard, 
And Night came on, not by degrees prepard, 
But all at once; at once the Winds arise, 
The Thunders roul, the forky Lightning flies  
In vain the Master issues out Commands,
In vain the trembling Sailors ply their Hands;  
The Tempest unforeseen prevents their Care, 
And from the first they labour in despair.  
The giddy Ship betwixt the Winds and Tides, 
Forcd back and forwards, in a Circle rides,
Stund with the diffrent Blows; then shoots amain  
Till counterbuffd she stops, and sleeps again. 
Not more aghast the proud Archangel fell, 
Plungd from the height of Heavn to deepest Hell,  
Than stood the Lover of his Love possessd
Now cursd the more, the more he had been blessd;  
More anxious for her Danger than his own, 
Death he defies; but would be lost alone. 
Sad Iphigene to Womanish Complaints 
Adds pious Prayrs, and wearies all the Saints;
Evn if she could, her Love she would repent, 
But since she cannot, dreads the Punishment:  
Her forfeit Faith, and Pasimond betrayd, 
Are ever present, and her Crime upbraid.  
She blames herself, nor blames her Lover less;
Augments her Anger as her Fears increase; 
From her own Back the Burden would remove,  
And lays the Load on his ungovernd Love, 
Which interposing durst in Heavns despight  
Invade, and violate anothers Right:
The Powrs incensd awhile deferrd his Pain, 
And made him Master of his Vows in vain:  
But soon they punishd his presumptuous Pride;  
That for his daring Enterprize she dyd,  
Who rather not resisted, than complyd.
Then impotent of Mind, with alterd Sense,  
She huggd th Offender, and forgave th Offence, 
Sex to the last: Mean time with Sails declind  
The wandring Vessel drove before the Wind: 
Tossd, and retossd, aloft, and then alow;
Nor Port they seek, nor certain Course they know, 
But evry moment wait the coming Blow.  
Thus blindly drivn, by breaking Day they viewd  
The Land before em, and their Fears renewd; 
The Land was welcome, but the Tempest bore
The threatend Ship against a rocky Shore.  
A winding Bay was near; to this they bent,  
And just escapd; their Force already spent.  
Secure from Storms, and panting from the Sea, 
The Land unknown at leisure they survey;
And saw (but soon their sickly Sight withdrew)  
The rising Towrs of Rhodes at distant view;  
And cursd the hostile Shoar of Pasimond, 
Savd from the Seas, and shipwreckd on the Ground. 
The frighted Sailors tryd their Strength in vain
To turn the Stern, and tempt the stormy Main; 
But the stiff Wind withstood the labring Oar,  
And forcd them forward on the fatal Shoar! 
The crooked Keel now bites the Rhodian Strand,  
And the Ship moord, constrains the Crew to land:
Yet still they might be safe, because unknown;  
But as ill Fortune seldom comes alone,  
The Vessel they dismissd was drivn before,  
Already shelterd on their Native Shoar;  
Known each, they know: But each with change of Chear;
The vanquishd side exults; the Victors fear; 
Not them but theirs, made Prisners ere they Fight, 
Despairing Conquest and deprivd of Flight. 
The Country rings around with loud Alarms,  
And raw in Fields the rude Militia swarms;
Mouths without Hands; maintaind at vast Expence, 
In Peace a Charge, in War a weak Defence; 
Stout once a Month they march, a blustring Band, 
And ever, but in times of Need, at hand;  
This was the Morn when issuing on the Guard,
Drawn up in Rank and File they stood prepard 
Of seeming Arms to make a short essay,  
Then hasten to be Drunk, the Business of the Day. 
The Cowards would have fled, but that they knew 
Themselves so many, and their Foes so few;
But crowding on, the last the first impel;  
Till overborn with weight the Cyprians fell.  
Cymon inslavd, who first the War begun,  
And Iphigene once more is lost and won. 
Deep in a Dungeon was the Captive cast,
Deprivd of Day, and held in Fetters fast:  
His Life was only spard at their Request,  
Whom taken he so nobly had releasd:  
But Iphigenia was the Ladies Care,  
Each in their turn addressd to treat the Fair;
While Pasimond and his, the Nuptial Feast prepare.  
Her secret Soul to Cymon was inclind,  
But she must suffer what her Fates assignd;  
So passive is the Church of Womankind.  
What worse to Cymon could his Fortune deal,
Rowld to the lowest Spoke of all her Wheel?  
It rested to dismiss the downward weight, 
Or raise him upward to his former height; 
The latter pleasd; and Love (concernd the most) 
Prepard th amends, for what by Love he lost.
The Sire of Pasimond had left a Son,  
Though younger, yet for Courage early known,  
Ormisda calld, to whom, by Promise tyd, 
A Rhodian Beauty was the destind Bride:  
Cassandra was her Name, above the rest
Renownd for Birth, with Fortune amply blessd. 
Lysymachus who ruld the Rhodian State, 
Was then by choice their annual Magistrate: 
He lovd Cassandra too with equal Fire, 
But Fortune had not favourd his Desire;
Crossd by her Friends, by her not disapprovd, 
Nor yet preferrd, or like Ormisda lovd: 
So stood th Affair: Some little Hope remaind, 
That should his Rival chance to lose, he gaind.  
Meantime young Pasimond his Marriage pressd,
Ordaind the Nuptial Day, prepard the Feast; 
And frugally resolvd (the Charge to shun,  
Which would be double should he wed alone)  
To join his Brothers Bridal with his own.  
Lysymachus oppressd with mortal Grief
Receivd the News, and studyd quick Relief:  
The fatal Day approachd: If Force were usd, 
The Magistrate his publick Trust abusd;  
To Justice liable, as Law requird, 
For when his Office ceasd, the his Powr expird:
While Powr remaind, the Means were in his Hand  
By Force to seize, and then forsake the Land: 
Betwixt Extreams he knew not how to move, 
A Slave to Fame, but more a Slave to Love:  
Restraining others, yet himself not free,
Made impotent by Powr, debasd by Dignity! 
Both Sides he weighd: But after much Debate, 
The Man prevaild above the Magistrate. 
Love never fails to master what he finds, 
But works a diffrent way in diffrent Minds,
The Fool enlightens, and the Wise he blinds.  
This Youth proposing to possess, and scape, 
Began in Murder, to conclude in Rape: 
Unpraisd by me, tho Heavn sometime may bless 
An impious Act with undeservd Success:
The Great, it seems, are priviledgd alone  
To punish all Injustice but their own.  
But here I stop, not daring to proceed, 
Yet blush to flatter an unrighteous Deed: 
For Crimes are but permitted, not decreed.
Resolvd on Force, his Wit the Pretor bent  
To find the Means that might secure th event;  
Nor long he labourd, for his lucky Thought 
In Captive Cymon found the Friend he sought.  
Th Example pleasd: The Cause and Crime the same;
An injurd Lover, and a ravishd Dame.  
How much he durst he knew by what he dard, 
The less he had to lose, the less he card  
To menage loathsom Life when Love was the Reward. 
This ponderd well, and fixd on his Intent,
In depth of Night he for the Prisner sent; 
In secret sent, the publick View to shun, 
Then with a sober Smile he thus begun:  
The Powrs above, who bounteously bestow  
Their Gifts and Graces on Mankind below,
Yet prove our Merit first, nor blindly give 
To such as are not worthy to receive: 
For Valour and for Virtue they provide  
Their due Reward, but first they must be tryd: 
These fruitful Seeds within your Mind they sowd;
Twas yours t improve the Talent they bestowd;  
They gave you to be born of noble Kind, 
They gave you Love to lighten up your Mind  
And purge the grosser Parts; they gave you Care 
To please, and Courage to deserve the Fair.
Thus far they tryd you, and by Proof they found  
The Grain intrusted in a grateful Ground: 
But still the great Experiment remaind,  
They sufferd you to lose the Prize you gaind; 
That you might learn the Gift was theirs alone,
And when restord, to them the Blessing own.  
Restord it soon will be; the Means prepard, 
The Difficulty smoothd, the Danger shard: 
Be but your self, the Care to me resign,  
Then Iphigene is yours, Cassandra mine.
Your Rival Pasimond pursues your Life,  
Impatient to revenge his ravishd Wife, 
But yet not his; to Morrow is behind, 
And Love our Fortunes in one Band has joind: 
Two Brothers are our Foes, Ormisda mine,
As much declard, as Pasimond is thine: 
To Morrow must their common Vows be tyd: 
With Love to Friend, and Fortune for our Guide, 
Let both resolve to die, or each redeem a Bride.  
Right I have none, nor hast thou much to plead;
Tis Force when done must justify the Deed: 
Our Task performd we next prepare for Flight:  
And let the Losers talk in vain of Right: 
We with the Fair will sail before the Wind  
If they are grievd, I leave the Laws behind.
Speak thy Resolves; if now thy Courage droop, 
Despair in Prison, and abandon Hope;  
But if thou darst in Arms thy Love regain, 
(For Liberty without thy Love were vain:) 
Then second my Design to seize the Prey,
Or lead to second Rape, for well thou knowst the way.  
Said Cymon, overjoyd, Do Thou propose  
The Means to Fight, and only shew the Foes; 
For from the first, when Love had fird my Mind,  
Resolvd I left the Care of Life behind.
To this the bold Lysymachus replyd,  
Let Heavn be neuter and the Sword decide:  
The Spousals are prepard, already play 
The Minstrels, and provoke the tardy Day: 
By this the Brides are wakd, their Grooms are dressd;
All Rhodes is summond to the Nuptial Feast,  
All but my self, the sole unbidden Guest. 
Unbidden though I am, I will be there,  
And, joind by thee, intend to joy the Fair.  
Now hear the rest; when Day resigns the Light,
And chearful Torches guild the jolly Night; 
Be ready at my Call, my chosen few  
With Arms administerd shall aid thy Crew.  
Then entring unexpected will we seize 
Our destind Prey, from Men dissolvd in ease,
By Wine disabled, unprepard for Fight, 
And hastning to the Seas suborn our Flight:  
The Seas are ours, for I command the Fort,  
A Ship well mand, expects us in the Port:  
If they, or if their Friends the Prize contest,
Death shall attend the Man who dares resist.  
It pleasd! The Prisner to his Hold retird, 
His Troop with equal Emulation fird, 
All fixd to Fight, and all their wonted Work requird. 
The Sun arose; the Streets were throngd around,
The Palace opend, and the Posts were crownd:  
The double Bridegroom at the Door attends 
Th expected Spouse, and entertains the Friends:  
They meet, they lead to Church; the Priests invoke  
The Powrs, and feed the Flames with fragrant Smoke:
This done they Feast, and at the close of Night 
By kindled Torches vary their Delight,  
These lead the lively Dance, and those the brimming Bowls invite. 
Now, at th appointed Place and Hour assignd,  
With Souls resolvd the Ravishers were joind:
Three Bands are formd: The first is sent before  
To favour the Retreat and guard the Shore:  
The second at the Palace-gate is placd,  
And up the lofty Stairs ascend the last:  
A peaceful Troop they seem with shining Vests,
But Coats of Male beneath secure their Breasts. 
Dauntless they enter, Cymon at their Head,  
And find the Feast renewd, the Table spread: 
Sweet Voices mixd with instrumental Sounds 
Ascend the vaulted Roof, the vaulted Roof rebounds.
When like the Harpies rushing through the Hall  
The suddain Troop appears, the Tables fall, 
Their smoaking Load is on the Pavement thrown;  
Each Ravisher prepares to seize his own:  
The Brides invaded with a rude Embrace
Shreek out for Aid, Confusion fills the Place:  
Quick to redeem the Prey their plighted Lords 
Advance, the Palace gleams with shining Swords. 
But late is all Defence; and Succour vain;  
The Rape is made, the Ravishers remain:
Two sturdy Slaves were only sent before 
To bear the purchasd Prize in Safety to the Shore. 
The Troop retires, the Lovers close the rear, 
With forward Faces not confessing Fear: 
Backward they move, but scorn their Pace to mend,
Then seek the Stairs, and with slow hast descend. 
Fierce Pasimond, their passage to prevent,  
Thrust full on Cymons Back in his descent, 
The Blade returnd unbathd, and to the Handle bent:  
Stout Cymon soon remounts, and cleft in two
His Rivals Head with one descending Blow:  
And as the next in rank Ormisda stood,  
He turnd the Point; The sword inurd to Blood  
Bord his unguarded Breast, which pourd a purple Flood.  
With vowd Revenge the gathring Crowd pursues,
The Ravishers turn Head, the Fight renews;  
The Hall is heapd with Corps; the sprinkled Gore 
Besmears the Walls, and floats the Marble Floor.  
Dispersd at length the drunken Squadron flies, 
The Victors to their Vessel bear the Prize;
And hear behind loud Groans, and lamentable Cries.  
The Crew with merry Shouts their Anchors weigh, 
Then ply their Oars, and brush the buxom Sea, 
While Troops of gatherd Rhodians croud the Key.  
What should the People do, when left alone?
The Governor, and Government are gone;  
The publick Wealth to Foreign Parts conveyd; 
Some Troops disbanded, and the rest unpaid. 
Rhodes is the Soveraign of the Sea no more; 
Their Ships unriggd, and spent their Naval Store;
They neither could defend, nor can pursue,  
But grind their Teeth, and cast a helpless view:  
In vain with Darts a distant War they try,  
Short, and more short the missive Weapons fly.  
Mean while the Ravishers their Crimes enjoy,
And flying Sails, and sweeping Oars employ: 
The Cliffs of Rhodes in little space are lost;  
Joves Isle they seek; nor Jove denies his Coast. 
In safety landed on the Candian Shore,  
With generous Wines their Spirits they restore;
There Cymon with his Rhodian Friend resides,  
Both Court, and Wed at once the willing Brides. 
A War ensues, the Cretans own their Cause,  
Stiff to defend their hospitable Laws:  
Both Parties lose by turns; and neither wins,
Till Peace propounded by a Truce begins.  
The Kindred of the Slain forgive the Deed,  
But a short Exile must for Show precede;  
The Term expird, from Candia they remove;  
And happy each at Home enjoys his love.

**
Amaryllis
***

TO Amaryllis Love compells my way,  
My browzing Goats upon the Mountains stray: 
O Tityrus, tend them well, and see them fed 
In Pastures fresh, and to their watring led;  
And ware the Ridgling with his butting head.
Ah, beauteous Nymph, can you forget your Love,  
The conscious Grottos, and the shady Grove; 
Where stretcht at ease your tender Limbs were laid, 
Your nameless Beauties nakedly displayd? 
Then I was calld your darling, your desire,
With Kisses such as set my Soul on fire:  
But you are changd, yet I am still the same; 
My heart maintains for both a double Flame; 
Grievd, but unmovd, and patient of your scorn:  
So faithfull I, and you so much forsworn!
I dye, and Death will finish all my pain; 
Yet eer I dye, behold me once again: 
Am I so much deformd, so changd of late?  
What partial Judges are our Love and Hate!  
Ten Wildings have I gatherd for my Dear;
How ruddy like your Lips their streaks appear!  
Far off you viewd them with a longing Eye  
Upon the topmost branch (the Tree was high;)  
Yet nimbly up, from bough to bough I swervd, 
And for to Morrow have Ten more reservd.
Look on me Kindly, and some pity shew,  
Or give me leave at least to look on you. 
Some God transform me by his Heavenly powr 
Evn to a Bee to buzz within your Bowr,  
The winding Ivy-chaplet to invade,
And folded Fern, that your fair Forehead shade. 
Now to my cost the force of Love I find;  
The heavy hand he bears on humane kind. 
The Milk of Tygers was his Infant food, 
Taught from his tender years the tast of blood;
His Brother whelps and he ran wild about the wood.  
Ah nymph, traind up in his Tyrannick Court,  
To make the suffrings of your Slaves your sport! 
Unheeded Ruine! treacherous delight!  
O polishd hardness, softend to the sight!
Whose radiant Eyes your Ebon Brows adorn, 
Like Midnight those, and these like break of Morn!  
Smile once again, revive me with your Charms: 
And let me dye contented in your Arms.  
I would not ask to live another Day,
Might I but sweetly Kiss my Soul away.  
Ah, why am I from empty Joys debarrd?  
For Kisses are but empty, when Compard!  
I rave, and in my raging fit shall tear 
The Garland which I wove for you to wear,
Of Parsley with a wreath of Ivy bound,  
And borderd with a Rosie edging round. 
What pangs I feel, unpityd and unheard!  
Since I must dye, why is my Fate deferrd!  
I strip my Body of my Shepherds Frock:
Behold that dreadfull downfall of a Rock, 
Where yon old Fisher views the Waves from high! 
Tis that Convenient leap I mean to try.  
You would be pleasd to see me plunge to shoar, 
But better pleasd if I should rise no more.
I might have read my Fortune long agoe, 
When, seeking my success in Love to know, 
I tryd th infallible Prophetique way, 
A Poppy leaf upon my palm to lay; 
I struck, and yet no lucky crack did follow,
Yet I struck hard, and yet the leaf lay hollow. 
And, which was worse, if any worse coud prove  
The withring leaf foreshewd your withring Love.  
Yet farther (Ah, how far a Lover dares!)  
My last recourse I had to Seive and Sheeres;
And told the Witch Agreo my disease,  
(Agreo, that in Harvest usd to lease;  
But Harvest done, to Chare-work did aspire; 
Meat, drink, and Tow-pence was her daily hire;) 
To work she went, her Charms she mutterd oer,
And yet the resty Seive waggd neer the more;  
I wept for Woe, the testy Beldame swore,  
And foaming with her God, foretold my Fate; 
That I was doomd to Love, and you to Hate. 
A milk-white Goat for you I did provide;
Two milk-white Kids run frisking by her side, 
For which the Nut-brown Lass, Erithacis,  
Full often offerd many a savoury Kiss. 
Hers they shall be, since you refuse the price, 
What madman would oerstand his Market twice!
My right Eye itches, some good-luck is near,  
Perhaps my Amaryllis may appear;  
Ill set up such a Note as she shall hear.  
What Nymph but my melodious Voice would move? 
She must be Flint, if she refuse my Love.
Hippomenes, who ran with Noble strife 
To win his Lady, or to lose his Life, 
(What shift some men will make to get a Wife!)  
Threw down a Golden Apple in her way; 
For all her haste she could not chuse but stay:
Renown said run; the glittring Bribe cryd hold; 
The Man might have been hangd, but for his Gold. 
Yet some suppose twas Love (some few indeed,)  
That stopt the fatal fury of her Speed: 
She saw, she sighd; her nimble Feet refuse
Their wonted Speed, and she took pains to lose. 
A Prophet some, and some a Poet cry,  
(No matter which, so neither of them lye) 
From steepy Othrys top to Pylus drove 
His herd; and for his pains enjoyd his Love:
If such another Wager shoud be laid, 
Ill find the Man, if you can find the Maid.  
Why name I Men, When Love extended finds  
His powr on high, and in Celestial Minds?  
Venus the Shepherds homely habit took,
And managd something else besides the Crook; 
Nay, when Adonis dyd, was heard to roar, 
And never from her heart forgave the Boar.  
How blest is fair Endymion with his Moon, 
Who sleeps on Latmos top from Night to Noon!
What Jason from Medeas Love possest, 
You shall not hear, but know tis like the rest.  
My aking Head can scarce support the pain;  
This cursed Love will surely turn my Brain: 
Feel how it shoots, and yet you take no Pity,
Nay then tis time to end my doleful Ditty. 
A clammy Sweat does oer my Temples creep;  
My heavy Eyes are urgd with Iron sleep:  
I lay me down to gasp my latest Breath, 
The Wolves will get a Breakfast by my Death;
Yet scarce enough their hunger to supply, 
For Love has made me Carrion eer I dye.

**
The Epithalmium of Helen and Menelaus
***

TWELVE Spartan Virgins, noble, young, and fair, 
With Violet wreaths adornd their flowing hair; 
And to the pompous Palace did resort, 
Where Menelaus kept his Royal Court.  
There hand in hand a comely Quire they led;
To sing a blessing to his Nuptial Bed,  
With curious Needles wrought, and painted Flowrs bespread. 
Joves beauteous Daughter now his Bride must be, 
And Jove himself was less a God than he:  
For this their artful hands instruct the Lute to sound,
Their feet assist their hands, and justly beat the ground.  
This was their Song: Why, happy Bridegroom, why,  
Ere yet the Stars are kindld in the Skie, 
Ere twilight shades, or Evning dews are shed, 
Why dost thou steal so soon away to Bed?
Has Somnus brushd thy Eye-lids with his Rod, 
Or do thy Legs refuse to bear their Load  
With flowing bowles of a more generous God? 
If gentle Slumber on thy Temples creep, 
(But naughty Man thou dost not mean to sleep)
Betake thee to thy Bed, thou drowzy Drone,  
Sleep by thy self, and leave thy Bride alone: 
Go, leave her with her Maiden Mates to play 
At sports more harmless, till the break of day: 
Give us this Evening: thou hast Morn and Night,
And all the year before thee, for delight.  
O happy Youth! to thee, among the crowd 
Of Rival Princes, Cupid sneezd aloud;  
And every lucky Omen sent before, 
To meet thee landing on the Spartan shore.
Of all our Heroes thou canst boast alone, 
That Jove, when ere he Thunders, calls thee Son. 
Betwixt two Sheets thou shalt enjoy her bare, 
With whom no Grecian Virgin can compare 
So soft, so sweet, so balmy, and so fair.
A Boy like thee would make a Kingly line: 
But oh, a Girl like her must be divine. 
Her equals we, in years, but not in face, 
Twelve score Viragos of the Spartan Race,  
While naked to Eurotas banks we bend,
And there in manly exercise contend,  
When she appears, are all eclipsd and lost,  
And hide the beauties that we made our boast. 
So, when the Night and Winter disappear,  
The Purple morning, rising with the year,
Salutes the spring, as her Celestial eyes 
Adorn the World, and brighten all the Skies:  
So beauteous Helen shines among the rest, 
Tall, slender, straight, with all the Graces blest. 
As Pines the Mountains, or as Fields the Corn,
Or as Thessalian Steeds the Race adorn; 
So Rosie colourd Helen is the pride  
Of Lacedemon, and of Greece beside. 
Like her no Nymph can willing Ozyers bend 
In basket-works, which painted streaks commend:
With Pallas in the Loomb she may contend. 
But none, ah! none can animate the Lyre,  
And the mute strings with Vocal Souls inspire:  
Whether the Learnd Minerva be her Theam, 
Or chaste Diana bathing in the Stream;
None can record their Heavenly praise so well 
As Helen, in whose eyes ten thousand Cupids dwell.  
O fair, O Graceful! yet with Maids inrolld,  
But whom to morrows Sun a Matron shall behold! 
Yet ere to morrows Sun shall show his head,
The dewy paths of meadows we will tread.  
For Crowns and Chaplets to adorn thy head.  
Where all shall weep, and wish for thy return,  
As bleating Lambs their absent Mother mourn.  
Our Noblest Maids shall to thy Name bequeath
The boughs of Lotos, formd into a wreath.  
This Monument, thy Maiden beauties due, 
High on a Plane tree shall be hung to view: 
On the smooth rind the Passenger shall see  
Thy Name ingravd, and worship Helens Tree:
Balm, from a Silver box distilld around  
Shall all bedew the roots, and scent the sacred ground. 
The balm, tis true, can aged Plants prolong, 
But Helens name will keep it ever young.  
Hail Bride, hail Bridegroom, son in Law to Jove!
With fruitful joys Latona bless your Love!  
Let Venus furnish you with full desires,  
Add vigour to your wills, and fuel to your fires! 
Almighty Jove augment your wealthy store, 
Give much to you, and to his Grandsons more!
From generous Loyns a generous Race will spring,  
Each Girl, like her, a Queen; each Boy, like you, a King. 
Now sleep if sleep you can; but while you rest, 
Sleep close, with folded arms, and breast to breast:  
Rise in the morn; but oh before you rise,
Forget not to perform your morning Sacrifice. 
We will be with you ere the crowing Cock 
Salute the light, and struts before his featherd Flock.  
Hymen, oh Hymen, to thy Triumphs run, 
And view the mighty spoils thou hast in Battle won.

**
The Despairing Lover
***

WITH inauspicious love, a wretched Swain  
Pursud the fairest Nimph of all the Plain; 
Fairest indeed, but prouder far than fair,  
She plungd him hopeless in a deep despair: 
Her heavnly form too haughtily she prizd,
His person hated, and his Gifts despisd; 
Nor knew the force of Cupids cruel darts, 
Nor feard his awful power on human hearts; 
But either from her hopeless Lover fled,  
Or with disdainful glances shot him dead.
No kiss, no look, to cheer the drooping Boy;  
No word she spoke, she scornd evn to deny.  
But, as a hunted Panther casts about  
Her glaring eyes, and pricks her listning ears to scout, 
So she, to shun his Toyls, her cares imployd,
And fiercely in her savage freedom joyd. 
Her mouth she writhd, her forehead taught to frown,  
Her eyes to sparkle fires to Love unknown:  
Her sallow Cheeks her envious mind did show,  
And every feature spoke aloud the curstness of a Shrew.
Yet coud not he his obvious Fate escape; 
His love still drest her in a pleasing shape; 
And every sullen frown, and bitter scorn, 
But fannd the fuel that too fast did burn. 
Long time, unequal to his mighty pain,
He strove to curb it, but he strove in vain:  
At last his woes broke out, and beggd relief 
With tears, the dumb petitioners of grief:  
With Tears so tender, as adornd his Love,  
And any heart, but only hers, woud move.
Trembling before her bolted doors he stood, 
And there pourd out th unprofitable flood:  
Staring his eyes, and haggard was his look; 
Then, kissing first the threshold, thus he spoke. 
Ah Nymph more cruel than of humane Race,
Thy Tygress heart belies thy Angel Face:  
Too well thou showst thy Pedigree from Stone:  
Thy Grandames was the first by Pyrrha thrown: 
Unworthy thou to be so long desird;  
But so my Love, and so my Fate requird.
I beg not now (for tis in vain) to live; 
But take this gift, the last that I can give. 
This friendly Cord shall soon decide the strife 
Betwixt my lingring Love and loathsome life: 
This moment puts an end to all my pain;
I shall no more despair, nor thou disdain.  
Farewel, ungrateful and unkind! I go  
Condemnd by thee to those sad shades below.  
I go th extreamest remedy to prove,  
To drink Oblivion, and to drench my Love:
There happily to lose my long desires:  
But ah, what draught so deep to quench my Fires?  
Farewell, ye never-opening Gates, ye Stones,  
And Threshold guilty of my Midnight Moans:  
What I have sufferd here ye know too well;
What I shall do the gods and I can tell.  
The Rose is fragrant, but it fades in time: 
The Violet sweet, but quickly past the prime; 
White Lillies hang their heads, and soon decay, 
And whiter Snow in minutes melts away:
Such is your blooming youth, and withering so:  
The time will come, it will, when you shall know  
The rage of Love; your haughty heart shall burn 
In Flames like mine, and meet a like return.  
Obdurate as you are, oh! hear at least
My dying prayers, and grant my last request.  
When first you ope your doors, and, passing by, 
The sad ill Omend Object meets your Eye,  
Think it not lost, a moment if you stay;  
The breathless wretch, so made by you, survey:
Some cruel pleasure will from thence arise, 
To view the mighty ravage of your Eyes. 
I wish (but oh! my wish is vain I fear) 
The kind Oblation of a falling Tear:  
Then loose the knot, and take me from the place,
And spread your Mantle oer my grizly Face; 
Upon my livid Lips bestow a kiss  
O envy not the dead, they feel not bliss! 
Nor fear your kisses can restore my breath; 
Een you are not more pittiless than death
Then for my Corps a homely Grave provide, 
Which Love and me from publick Scorn may hide,  
Thrice call upon my Name, thrice beat your Breast,  
And hayl me thrice to everlasting rest: 
Last let my Tomb this sad Inscription bear:
A wretch whom Love has killd lies buried here; 
Oh, Passengers, Amintas Eyes beware.  
Thus having said, and furious with his Love,  
He heavd with more than humane force to move 
A weighty Stone (the labour of a Team)
And raisd from thence he reachd the Neighbouring Beam:  
Around its bulk a sliding knot he throws, 
And fitted to his Neck the fatal noose: 
Then spurning backward, took a swing, till death 
Crept up, and stoppd the passage of his Breath.
The bounce burst ope the door; the Scornful Fair  
Relentless lookt, and saw him beat his quivering feet in Air, 
Nor wept his fate, nor cast a pitying eye,  
Nor took him down, but brusht regardless by:  
And, as she passd, her chance or fate was such,
Her Garments toucht the dead, polluted by the touch.  
Next to the dance, thence to the Bath did move; 
The bath was sacred to the God of Love; 
Whose injurd Image, with a wrathful Eye, 
Stood threatning from a Pedestal on high:
Nodding a while, and watchful of his blow,  
He fell; and falling crusht th ungrateful Nymph below: 
Her gushing Blood the Pavement all besmeard; 
And this her last expiring Voice was heard; 
Lovers, farewell, revenge has reacht my scorn;
Thus warnd, be wise, and love for love return.

**
Metamorphoses
***

Of bodies chang'd to various forms, I sing: 
Ye Gods, from whom these miracles did spring, 
Inspire my numbers with coelestial heat; 
'Till I my long laborious work compleat: 
And add perpetual tenour to my rhimes, 
Deduc'd from Nature's birth, to Caesar's times. 
Before the seas, and this terrestrial ball, 
And Heav'n's high canopy, that covers all, 
One was the face of Nature; if a face: 
Rather a rude and indigested mass: 
A lifeless lump, unfashion'd, and unfram'd, 
Of jarring seeds; and justly Chaos nam'd. 
No sun was lighted up, the world to view; 
No moon did yet her blunted horns renew: 
Nor yet was Earth suspended in the sky, 
Nor pois'd, did on her own foundations lye: 
Nor seas about the shores their arms had thrown; 
But earth, and air, and water, were in one. 
Thus air was void of light, and earth unstable, 
And water's dark abyss unnavigable. 
No certain form on any was imprest; 
All were confus'd, and each disturb'd the rest. 
For hot and cold were in one body fixt; 
And soft with hard, and light with heavy mixt. 

But God, or Nature, while they thus contend, 
To these intestine discords put an end: 
Then earth from air, and seas from earth were driv'n, 
And grosser air sunk from aetherial Heav'n. 
Thus disembroil'd, they take their proper place; 
The next of kin, contiguously embrace; 
And foes are sunder'd, by a larger space. 
The force of fire ascended first on high, 
And took its dwelling in the vaulted sky: 
Then air succeeds, in lightness next to fire; 
Whose atoms from unactive earth retire. 
Earth sinks beneath, and draws a num'rous throng 
Of pondrous, thick, unwieldy seeds along. 
About her coasts, unruly waters roar; 
And rising, on a ridge, insult the shore. 
Thus when the God, whatever God was he, 
Had form'd the whole, and made the parts agree, 
That no unequal portions might be found, 
He moulded Earth into a spacious round: 
Then with a breath, he gave the winds to blow; 
And bad the congregated waters flow. 
He adds the running springs, and standing lakes; 
And bounding banks for winding rivers makes. 
Some part, in Earth are swallow'd up, the most 
In ample oceans, disembogu'd, are lost. 
He shades the woods, the vallies he restrains 
With rocky mountains, and extends the plains. 

And as five zones th' aetherial regions bind, 
Five, correspondent, are to Earth assign'd: 
The sun with rays, directly darting down, 
Fires all beneath, and fries the middle zone: 
The two beneath the distant poles, complain 
Of endless winter, and perpetual rain. 
Betwixt th' extreams, two happier climates hold 
The temper that partakes of hot, and cold. 
The fields of liquid air, inclosing all, 
Surround the compass of this earthly ball: 
The lighter parts lye next the fires above; 
The grosser near the watry surface move: 
Thick clouds are spread, and storms engender there, 
And thunder's voice, which wretched mortals fear, 
And winds that on their wings cold winter bear. 
Nor were those blustring brethren left at large, 
On seas, and shores, their fury to discharge: 
Bound as they are, and circumscrib'd in place, 
They rend the world, resistless, where they pass; 
And mighty marks of mischief leave behind; 
Such is the rage of their tempestuous kind. 
First Eurus to the rising morn is sent 
(The regions of the balmy continent); 
And Eastern realms, where early Persians run, 
To greet the blest appearance of the sun. 
Westward, the wanton Zephyr wings his flight; 
Pleas'd with the remnants of departing light: 
Fierce Boreas, with his off-spring, issues forth 
T' invade the frozen waggon of the North. 
While frowning Auster seeks the Southern sphere; 
And rots, with endless rain, th' unwholsom year. 

High o'er the clouds, and empty realms of wind, 
The God a clearer space for Heav'n design'd; 
Where fields of light, and liquid aether flow; 
Purg'd from the pondrous dregs of Earth below. 

Scarce had the Pow'r distinguish'd these, when streight 
The stars, no longer overlaid with weight, 
Exert their heads, from underneath the mass; 
And upward shoot, and kindle as they pass, 
And with diffusive light adorn their heav'nly place. 
Then, every void of Nature to supply, 
With forms of Gods he fills the vacant sky: 
New herds of beasts he sends, the plains to share: 
New colonies of birds, to people air: 
And to their oozy beds, the finny fish repair. 

A creature of a more exalted kind 
Was wanting yet, and then was Man design'd: 
Conscious of thought, of more capacious breast, 
For empire form'd, and fit to rule the rest: 
Whether with particles of heav'nly fire 
The God of Nature did his soul inspire, 
Or Earth, but new divided from the sky, 
And, pliant, still retain'd th' aetherial energy: 
Which wise Prometheus temper'd into paste, 
And, mixt with living streams, the godlike image cast. 

Thus, while the mute creation downward bend 
Their sight, and to their earthly mother tend, 
Man looks aloft; and with erected eyes 
Beholds his own hereditary skies. 
From such rude principles our form began; 
And earth was metamorphos'd into Man. 

The golden age was first; when Man yet new, 
No rule but uncorrupted reason knew: 
And, with a native bent, did good pursue. 
Unforc'd by punishment, un-aw'd by fear, 
His words were simple, and his soul sincere; 
Needless was written law, where none opprest: 
The law of Man was written in his breast: 
No suppliant crowds before the judge appear'd, 
No court erected yet, nor cause was heard: 
But all was safe, for conscience was their guard. 
The mountain-trees in distant prospect please, 
E're yet the pine descended to the seas: 
E're sails were spread, new oceans to explore: 
And happy mortals, unconcern'd for more, 
Confin'd their wishes to their native shore. 
No walls were yet; nor fence, nor mote, nor mound, 
Nor drum was heard, nor trumpet's angry sound: 
Nor swords were forg'd; but void of care and crime, 
The soft creation slept away their time. 
The teeming Earth, yet guiltless of the plough, 
And unprovok'd, did fruitful stores allow: 
Content with food, which Nature freely bred, 
On wildings and on strawberries they fed; 
Cornels and bramble-berries gave the rest, 
And falling acorns furnish'd out a feast. 
The flow'rs unsown, in fields and meadows reign'd: 
And Western winds immortal spring maintain'd. 
In following years, the bearded corn ensu'd 
From Earth unask'd, nor was that Earth renew'd. 
From veins of vallies, milk and nectar broke; 
And honey sweating through the pores of oak. 

But when good Saturn, banish'd from above, 
Was driv'n to Hell, the world was under Jove. 
Succeeding times a silver age behold, 
Excelling brass, but more excell'd by gold. 
Then summer, autumn, winter did appear: 
And spring was but a season of the year. 
The sun his annual course obliquely made, 
Good days contracted, and enlarg'd the bad. 
Then air with sultry heats began to glow; 
The wings of winds were clogg'd with ice and snow; 
And shivering mortals, into houses driv'n, 
Sought shelter from th' inclemency of Heav'n. 
Those houses, then, were caves, or homely sheds; 
With twining oziers fenc'd; and moss their beds. 
Then ploughs, for seed, the fruitful furrows broke, 
And oxen labour'd first beneath the yoke. 

To this came next in course, the brazen age: 
A warlike offspring, prompt to bloody rage, 
Not impious yet... Hard steel succeeded then: 
And stubborn as the metal, were the men. 
Truth, modesty, and shame, the world forsook: 
Fraud, avarice, and force, their places took. 
Then sails were spread, to every wind that blew. 
Raw were the sailors, and the depths were new: 
Trees, rudely hollow'd, did the waves sustain; 
E're ships in triumph plough'd the watry plain. 

Then land-marks limited to each his right: 
For all before was common as the light. 
Nor was the ground alone requir'd to bear 
Her annual income to the crooked share, 
But greedy mortals, rummaging her store, 
Digg'd from her entrails first the precious oar; 
Which next to Hell, the prudent Gods had laid; 
And that alluring ill, to sight display'd. 
Thus cursed steel, and more accursed gold, 
Gave mischief birth, and made that mischief bold: 
And double death did wretched Man invade, 
By steel assaulted, and by gold betray'd, 
Now (brandish'd weapons glittering in their hands) 
Mankind is broken loose from moral bands; 
No rights of hospitality remain: 
The guest, by him who harbour'd him, is slain, 
The son-in-law pursues the father's life; 
The wife her husband murders, he the wife. 
The step-dame poyson for the son prepares; 
The son inquires into his father's years. 
Faith flies, and piety in exile mourns; 
And justice, here opprest, to Heav'n returns. 

Nor were the Gods themselves more safe above; 
Against beleaguer'd Heav'n the giants move. 
Hills pil'd on hills, on mountains mountains lie, 
To make their mad approaches to the skie. 
'Till Jove, no longer patient, took his time 
T' avenge with thunder their audacious crime: 
Red light'ning plaid along the firmament, 
And their demolish'd works to pieces rent. 
Sing'd with the flames, and with the bolts transfixt, 
With native Earth, their blood the monsters mixt; 
The blood, indu'd with animating heat, 
Did in th' impregnant Earth new sons beget: 
They, like the seed from which they sprung, accurst, 
Against the Gods immortal hatred nurst, 
An impious, arrogant, and cruel brood; 
Expressing their original from blood. 

Which when the king of Gods beheld from high 
(Withal revolving in his memory, 
What he himself had found on Earth of late, 
Lycaon's guilt, and his inhumane treat), 
He sigh'd; nor longer with his pity strove; 
But kindled to a wrath becoming Jove: 

Then call'd a general council of the Gods; 
Who summon'd, issue from their blest abodes, 
And fill th' assembly with a shining train. 
A way there is, in Heav'n's expanded plain, 
Which, when the skies are clear, is seen below, 
And mortals, by the name of Milky, know. 
The ground-work is of stars; through which the road 
Lyes open to the Thunderer's abode: 
The Gods of greater nations dwell around, 
And, on the right and left, the palace bound; 
The commons where they can: the nobler sort 
With winding-doors wide open, front the court. 
This place, as far as Earth with Heav'n may vie, 
I dare to call the Louvre of the skie. 
When all were plac'd, in seats distinctly known, 
And he, their father, had assum'd the throne, 
Upon his iv'ry sceptre first he leant, 
Then shook his head, that shook the firmament: 
Air, Earth, and seas, obey'd th' almighty nod; 
And, with a gen'ral fear, confess'd the God. 
At length, with indignation, thus he broke 
His awful silence, and the Pow'rs bespoke. 

I was not more concern'd in that debate 
Of empire, when our universal state 
Was put to hazard, and the giant race 
Our captive skies were ready to imbrace: 
For tho' the foe was fierce, the seeds of all 
Rebellion, sprung from one original; 
Now, wheresoever ambient waters glide, 
All are corrupt, and all must be destroy'd. 
Let me this holy protestation make, 
By Hell, and Hell's inviolable lake, 
I try'd whatever in the godhead lay: 
But gangren'd members must be lopt away, 
Before the nobler parts are tainted to decay. 
There dwells below, a race of demi-gods, 
Of nymphs in waters, and of fawns in woods: 
Who, tho' not worthy yet, in Heav'n to live, 
Let 'em, at least, enjoy that Earth we give. 
Can these be thought securely lodg'd below, 
When I my self, who no superior know, 
I, who have Heav'n and Earth at my command, 
Have been attempted by Lycaon's hand? 

At this a murmur through the synod went, 
And with one voice they vote his punishment. 
Thus, when conspiring traytors dar'd to doom 
The fall of Caesar, and in him of Rome, 
The nations trembled with a pious fear; 
All anxious for their earthly Thunderer: 
Nor was their care, o Caesar, less esteem'd 
By thee, than that of Heav'n for Jove was deem'd: 
Who with his hand, and voice, did first restrain 
Their murmurs, then resum'd his speech again. 
The Gods to silence were compos'd, and sate 
With reverence, due to his superior state. 

Cancel your pious cares; already he 
Has paid his debt to justice, and to me. 
Yet what his crimes, and what my judgments were, 
Remains for me thus briefly to declare. 
The clamours of this vile degenerate age, 
The cries of orphans, and th' oppressor's rage, 
Had reach'd the stars: I will descend, said I, 
In hope to prove this loud complaint a lye. 
Disguis'd in humane shape, I travell'd round 
The world, and more than what I heard, I found. 
O'er Maenalus I took my steepy way, 
By caverns infamous for beasts of prey: 
Then cross'd Cyllene, and the piny shade 
More infamous, by curst Lycaon made: 
Dark night had cover'd Heaven, and Earth, before 
I enter'd his unhospitable door. 
Just at my entrance, I display'd the sign 
That somewhat was approaching of divine. 
The prostrate people pray; the tyrant grins; 
And, adding prophanation to his sins, 
I'll try, said he, and if a God appear, 
To prove his deity shall cost him dear. 
'Twas late; the graceless wretch my death prepares, 
When I shou'd soundly sleep, opprest with cares: 
This dire experiment he chose, to prove 
If I were mortal, or undoubted Jove: 
But first he had resolv'd to taste my pow'r; 
Not long before, but in a luckless hour, 
Some legates, sent from the Molossian state, 
Were on a peaceful errand come to treat: 
Of these he murders one, he boils the flesh; 
And lays the mangled morsels in a dish: 
Some part he roasts; then serves it up, so drest, 
And bids me welcome to this humane feast. 
Mov'd with disdain, the table I o'er-turn'd; 
And with avenging flames, the palace burn'd. 
The tyrant in a fright, for shelter gains 
The neighb'ring fields, and scours along the plains. 
Howling he fled, and fain he wou'd have spoke; 
But humane voice his brutal tongue forsook. 
About his lips the gather'd foam he churns, 
And, breathing slaughters, still with rage he burns, 
But on the bleating flock his fury turns. 
His mantle, now his hide, with rugged hairs 
Cleaves to his back; a famish'd face he bears; 
His arms descend, his shoulders sink away 
To multiply his legs for chase of prey. 
He grows a wolf, his hoariness remains, 
And the same rage in other members reigns. 
His eyes still sparkle in a narr'wer space: 
His jaws retain the grin, and violence of his face 

This was a single ruin, but not one 
Deserves so just a punishment alone. 
Mankind's a monster, and th' ungodly times 
Confed'rate into guilt, are sworn to crimes. 
All are alike involv'd in ill, and all 
Must by the same relentless fury fall. 
Thus ended he; the greater Gods assent; 
By clamours urging his severe intent; 
The less fill up the cry for punishment. 
Yet still with pity they remember Man; 
And mourn as much as heav'nly spirits can. 
They ask, when those were lost of humane birth, 
What he wou'd do with all this waste of Earth: 
If his dispeopl'd world he would resign 
To beasts, a mute, and more ignoble line; 
Neglected altars must no longer smoke, 
If none were left to worship, and invoke. 
To whom the Father of the Gods reply'd, 
Lay that unnecessary fear aside: 
Mine be the care, new people to provide. 
I will from wondrous principles ordain 
A race unlike the first, and try my skill again. 

Already had he toss'd the flaming brand; 
And roll'd the thunder in his spacious hand; 
Preparing to discharge on seas and land: 
But stopt, for fear, thus violently driv'n, 
The sparks should catch his axle-tree of Heav'n. 
Remembring in the fates, a time when fire 
Shou'd to the battlements of Heaven aspire, 
And all his blazing worlds above shou'd burn; 
And all th' inferior globe to cinders turn. 
His dire artill'ry thus dismist, he bent 
His thoughts to some securer punishment: 
Concludes to pour a watry deluge down; 
And what he durst not burn, resolves to drown. 

The northern breath, that freezes floods, he binds; 
With all the race of cloud-dispelling winds: 
The south he loos'd, who night and horror brings; 
And foggs are shaken from his flaggy wings. 
From his divided beard two streams he pours, 
His head, and rheumy eyes distill in show'rs, 
With rain his robe, and heavy mantle flow: 
And lazy mists are lowring on his brow; 
Still as he swept along, with his clench'd fist 
He squeez'd the clouds, th' imprison'd clouds resist: 
The skies, from pole to pole, with peals resound; 
And show'rs inlarg'd, come pouring on the ground. 
Then, clad in colours of a various dye, 
Junonian Iris breeds a new supply 
To feed the clouds: impetuous rain descends; 
The bearded corn beneath the burden bends: 
Defrauded clowns deplore their perish'd grain; 
And the long labours of the year are vain. 

Nor from his patrimonial Heaven alone 
Is Jove content to pour his vengeance down; 
Aid from his brother of the seas he craves, 
To help him with auxiliary waves. 
The watry tyrant calls his brooks and floods, 
Who rowl from mossie caves (their moist abodes); 
And with perpetual urns his palace fill: 
To whom in brief, he thus imparts his will. 

Small exhortation needs; your pow'rs employ: 
And this bad world, so Jove requires, destroy. 
Let loose the reins to all your watry store: 
Bear down the damms, and open ev'ry door. 

The floods, by Nature enemies to land, 
And proudly swelling with their new command, 
Remove the living stones, that stopt their way, 
And gushing from their source, augment the sea. 
Then, with his mace, their monarch struck the ground; 
With inward trembling Earth receiv'd the wound; 
And rising streams a ready passage found. 
Th' expanded waters gather on the plain: 
They float the fields, and over-top the grain; 
Then rushing onwards, with a sweepy sway, 
Bear flocks, and folds, and lab'ring hinds away. 
Nor safe their dwellings were, for, sap'd by floods, 
Their houses fell upon their houshold Gods. 
The solid piles, too strongly built to fall, 
High o'er their heads, behold a watry wall: 
Now seas and Earth were in confusion lost; 
A world of waters, and without a coast. 

One climbs a cliff; one in his boat is born: 
And ploughs above, where late he sow'd his corn. 
Others o'er chimney-tops and turrets row, 
And drop their anchors on the meads below: 
Or downward driv'n, they bruise the tender vine, 
Or tost aloft, are knock'd against a pine. 
And where of late the kids had cropt the grass, 
The monsters of the deep now take their place. 
Insulting Nereids on the cities ride, 
And wond'ring dolphins o'er the palace glide. 
On leaves, and masts of mighty oaks they brouze; 
And their broad fins entangle in the boughs. 
The frighted wolf now swims amongst the sheep; 
The yellow lion wanders in the deep: 
His rapid force no longer helps the boar: 
The stag swims faster, than he ran before. 
The fowls, long beating on their wings in vain, 
Despair of land, and drop into the main. 
Now hills, and vales no more distinction know; 
And levell'd Nature lies oppress'd below. 
The most of mortals perish in the flood: 
The small remainder dies for want of food. 

A mountain of stupendous height there stands 
Betwixt th' Athenian and Boeotian lands, 
The bound of fruitful fields, while fields they were, 
But then a field of waters did appear: 
Parnassus is its name; whose forky rise 
Mounts thro' the clouds, and mates the lofty skies. 
High on the summit of this dubious cliff, 
Deucalion wafting, moor'd his little skiff. 
He with his wife were only left behind 
Of perish'd Man; they two were human kind. 
The mountain nymphs, and Themis they adore, 
And from her oracles relief implore. 
The most upright of mortal men was he; 
The most sincere, and holy woman, she. 

When Jupiter, surveying Earth from high, 
Beheld it in a lake of water lie, 
That where so many millions lately liv'd, 
But two, the best of either sex, surviv'd; 
He loos'd the northern wind; fierce Boreas flies 
To puff away the clouds, and purge the skies: 
Serenely, while he blows, the vapours driv'n, 
Discover Heav'n to Earth, and Earth to Heav'n. 
The billows fall, while Neptune lays his mace 
On the rough sea, and smooths its furrow'd face. 
Already Triton, at his call, appears 
Above the waves; a Tyrian robe he wears; 
And in his hand a crooked trumpet bears. 
The soveraign bids him peaceful sounds inspire, 
And give the waves the signal to retire. 
His writhen shell he takes; whose narrow vent 
Grows by degrees into a large extent, 
Then gives it breath; the blast with doubling sound, 
Runs the wide circuit of the world around: 
The sun first heard it, in his early east, 
And met the rattling ecchos in the west. 
The waters, listning to the trumpet's roar, 
Obey the summons, and forsake the shore. 

A thin circumference of land appears; 
And Earth, but not at once, her visage rears, 
And peeps upon the seas from upper grounds; 
The streams, but just contain'd within their bounds, 
By slow degrees into their channels crawl; 
And Earth increases, as the waters fall. 
In longer time the tops of trees appear, 
Which mud on their dishonour'd branches bear. 

At length the world was all restor'd to view; 
But desolate, and of a sickly hue: 
Nature beheld her self, and stood aghast, 
A dismal desart, and a silent waste. 

Which when Deucalion, with a piteous look 
Beheld, he wept, and thus to Pyrrha spoke: 
Oh wife, oh sister, oh of all thy kind 
The best, and only creature left behind, 
By kindred, love, and now by dangers joyn'd; 
Of multitudes, who breath'd the common air, 
We two remain; a species in a pair: 
The rest the seas have swallow'd; nor have we 
Ev'n of this wretched life a certainty. 
The clouds are still above; and, while I speak, 
A second deluge o'er our heads may break. 
Shou'd I be snatcht from hence, and thou remain, 
Without relief, or partner of thy pain, 
How cou'dst thou such a wretched life sustain? 
Shou'd I be left, and thou be lost, the sea 
That bury'd her I lov'd, shou'd bury me. 
Oh cou'd our father his old arts inspire, 
And make me heir of his informing fire, 
That so I might abolisht Man retrieve, 
And perisht people in new souls might live. 
But Heav'n is pleas'd, nor ought we to complain, 
That we, th' examples of mankind, remain. 
He said; the careful couple joyn their tears: 
And then invoke the Gods, with pious prayers. 
Thus, in devotion having eas'd their grief, 
From sacred oracles they seek relief; 
And to Cephysus' brook their way pursue: 
The stream was troubled, but the ford they knew; 
With living waters, in the fountain bred, 
They sprinkle first their garments, and their head, 
Then took the way, which to the temple led. 
The roofs were all defil'd with moss, and mire, 
The desart altars void of solemn fire. 
Before the gradual, prostrate they ador'd; 
The pavement kiss'd; and thus the saint implor'd. 

O righteous Themis, if the Pow'rs above 
By pray'rs are bent to pity, and to love; 
If humane miseries can move their mind; 
If yet they can forgive, and yet be kind; 
Tell how we may restore, by second birth, 
Mankind, and people desolated Earth. 
Then thus the gracious Goddess, nodding, said; 
Depart, and with your vestments veil your head: 
And stooping lowly down, with losen'd zones, 
Throw each behind your backs, your mighty mother's bones.

Amaz'd the pair, and mute with wonder stand, 
'Till Pyrrha first refus'd the dire command. 
Forbid it Heav'n, said she, that I shou'd tear 
Those holy reliques from the sepulcher. 
They ponder'd the mysterious words again, 
For some new sense; and long they sought in vain: 
At length Deucalion clear'd his cloudy brow, 
And said, the dark Aenigma will allow 
A meaning, which, if well I understand, 
From sacrilege will free the God's command: 
This Earth our mighty mother is, the stones 
In her capacious body, are her bones: 
These we must cast behind. With hope, and fear, 
The woman did the new solution hear: 
The man diffides in his own augury, 
And doubts the Gods; yet both resolve to try. 
Descending from the mount, they first unbind 
Their vests, and veil'd, they cast the stones behind: 
The stones (a miracle to mortal view, 
But long tradition makes it pass for true) 
Did first the rigour of their kind expel, 
And suppled into softness, as they fell; 
Then swell'd, and swelling, by degrees grew warm; 
And took the rudiments of human form. 
Imperfect shapes: in marble such are seen, 
When the rude chizzel does the man begin; 
While yet the roughness of the stone remains, 
Without the rising muscles, and the veins. 
The sappy parts, and next resembling juice, 
Were turn'd to moisture, for the body's use: 
Supplying humours, blood, and nourishment; 
The rest, too solid to receive a bent, 
Converts to bones; and what was once a vein, 
Its former name and Nature did retain. 
By help of pow'r divine, in little space, 
What the man threw, assum'd a manly face; 
And what the wife, renew'd the female race. 
Hence we derive our nature; born to bear 
Laborious life; and harden'd into care. 

The rest of animals, from teeming Earth 
Produc'd, in various forms receiv'd their birth. 
The native moisture, in its close retreat, 
Digested by the sun's aetherial heat, 
As in a kindly womb, began to breed: 
Then swell'd, and quicken'd by the vital seed. 
And some in less, and some in longer space, 
Were ripen'd into form, and took a sev'ral face. 
Thus when the Nile from Pharian fields is fled, 
And seeks, with ebbing tides, his ancient bed, 
The fat manure with heav'nly fire is warm'd; 
And crusted creatures, as in wombs, are form'd; 
These, when they turn the glebe, the peasants find; 
Some rude, and yet unfinish'd in their kind: 
Short of their limbs, a lame imperfect birth: 
One half alive; and one of lifeless earth. 

For heat, and moisture, when in bodies join'd, 
The temper that results from either kind 
Conception makes; and fighting 'till they mix, 
Their mingled atoms in each other fix. 
Thus Nature's hand the genial bed prepares 
With friendly discord, and with fruitful wars. 

From hence the surface of the ground, with mud 
And slime besmear'd (the faeces of the flood), 
Receiv'd the rays of Heav'n: and sucking in 
The seeds of heat, new creatures did begin: 
Some were of sev'ral sorts produc'd before, 
But of new monsters, Earth created more. 
Unwillingly, but yet she brought to light 
Thee, Python too, the wondring world to fright, 
And the new nations, with so dire a sight: 
So monstrous was his bulk, so large a space 
Did his vast body, and long train embrace. 
Whom Phoebus basking on a bank espy'd; 
E're now the God his arrows had not try'd 
But on the trembling deer, or mountain goat; 
At this new quarry he prepares to shoot. 
Though ev'ry shaft took place, he spent the store 
Of his full quiver; and 'twas long before 
Th' expiring serpent wallow'd in his gore. 
Then, to preserve the fame of such a deed, 
For Python slain, he Pythian games decred. 
Where noble youths for mastership shou'd strive, 
To quoit, to run, and steeds, and chariots drive. 
The prize was fame: in witness of renown 
An oaken garland did the victor crown. 
The laurel was not yet for triumphs born; 
But every green alike by Phoebus worn, 
Did, with promiscuous grace, his flowing locks adorn. 

The first and fairest of his loves, was she 
Whom not blind fortune, but the dire decree 
Of angry Cupid forc'd him to desire: 
Daphne her name, and Peneus was her sire. 
Swell'd with the pride, that new success attends, 
He sees the stripling, while his bow he bends, 
And thus insults him: Thou lascivious boy, 
Are arms like these for children to employ? 
Know, such atchievements are my proper claim; 
Due to my vigour, and unerring aim: 
Resistless are my shafts, and Python late 
In such a feather'd death, has found his fate. 
Take up the torch (and lay my weapons by), 
With that the feeble souls of lovers fry. 
To whom the son of Venus thus reply'd, 
Phoebus, thy shafts are sure on all beside, 
But mine of Phoebus, mine the fame shall be 
Of all thy conquests, when I conquer thee. 

He said, and soaring, swiftly wing'd his flight: 
Nor stopt but on Parnassus' airy height. 
Two diff'rent shafts he from his quiver draws; 
One to repel desire, and one to cause. 
One shaft is pointed with refulgent gold: 
To bribe the love, and make the lover bold: 
One blunt, and tipt with lead, whose base allay 
Provokes disdain, and drives desire away. 
The blunted bolt against the nymph he drest: 
But with the sharp transfixt Apollo's breast. 

Th' enamour'd deity pursues the chace; 
The scornful damsel shuns his loath'd embrace: 
In hunting beasts of prey, her youth employs; 
And Phoebe rivals in her rural joys. 
With naked neck she goes, and shoulders bare; 
And with a fillet binds her flowing hair. 
By many suitors sought, she mocks their pains, 
And still her vow'd virginity maintains. 
Impatient of a yoke, the name of bride 
She shuns, and hates the joys, she never try'd. 
On wilds, and woods, she fixes her desire: 
Nor knows what youth, and kindly love, inspire. 
Her father chides her oft: Thou ow'st, says he, 
A husband to thy self, a son to me. 
She, like a crime, abhors the nuptial bed: 
She glows with blushes, and she hangs her head. 
Then casting round his neck her tender arms, 
Sooths him with blandishments, and filial charms: 
Give me, my Lord, she said, to live, and die, 
A spotless maid, without the marriage tye. 
'Tis but a small request; I beg no more 
Than what Diana's father gave before. 
The good old sire was soften'd to consent; 
But said her wish wou'd prove her punishment: 
For so much youth, and so much beauty join'd, 
Oppos'd the state, which her desires design'd. 

The God of light, aspiring to her bed, 
Hopes what he seeks, with flattering fancies fed; 
And is, by his own oracles, mis-led. 
And as in empty fields the stubble burns, 
Or nightly travellers, when day returns, 
Their useless torches on dry hedges throw, 
That catch the flames, and kindle all the row; 
So burns the God, consuming in desire, 
And feeding in his breast a fruitless fire: 
Her well-turn'd neck he view'd (her neck was bare) 
And on her shoulders her dishevel'd hair; 
Oh were it comb'd, said he, with what a grace 
Wou'd every waving curl become her face! 
He view'd her eyes, like heav'nly lamps that shone, 
He view'd her lips, too sweet to view alone, 
Her taper fingers, and her panting breast; 
He praises all he sees, and for the rest 
Believes the beauties yet unseen are best: 
Swift as the wind, the damsel fled away, 
Nor did for these alluring speeches stay: 
Stay Nymph, he cry'd, I follow, not a foe. 
Thus from the lyon trips the trembling doe; 
Thus from the wolf the frighten'd lamb removes, 
And, from pursuing faulcons, fearful doves; 
Thou shunn'st a God, and shunn'st a God, that loves. 
Ah, lest some thorn shou'd pierce thy tender foot, 
Or thou shou'dst fall in flying my pursuit! 
To sharp uneven ways thy steps decline; 
Abate thy speed, and I will bate of mine. 
Yet think from whom thou dost so rashly fly; 
Nor basely born, nor shepherd's swain am I. 
Perhaps thou know'st not my superior state; 
And from that ignorance proceeds thy hate. 
Me Claros, Delphi, Tenedos obey; 
These hands the Patareian scepter sway. 
The King of Gods begot me: what shall be, 
Or is, or ever was, in Fate, I see. 
Mine is th' invention of the charming lyre; 
Sweet notes, and heav'nly numbers, I inspire. 
Sure is my bow, unerring is my dart; 
But ah! more deadly his, who pierc'd my heart. 
Med'cine is mine; what herbs and simples grow 
In fields, and forrests, all their pow'rs I know; 
And am the great physician call'd, below. 
Alas that fields and forrests can afford. 
No remedies to heal their love-sick lord! 
To cure the pains of love, no plant avails: 
And his own physick, the physician falls. 

She heard not half; so furiously she flies; 
And on her ear th' imperfect accent dies, 
Fear gave her wings; and as she fled, the wind 
Increasing, spread her flowing hair behind; 
And left her legs and thighs expos'd to view: 
Which made the God more eager to pursue. 
The God was young, and was too hotly bent 
To lose his time in empty compliment: 
But led by love, and fir'd with such a sight, 
Impetuously pursu'd his near delight. 

As when th' impatient greyhound slipt from far, 
Bounds o'er the glebe to course the fearful hare, 
She in her speed does all her safety lay; 
And he with double speed pursues the prey; 
O'er-runs her at the sitting turn, and licks 
His chaps in vain, and blows upon the flix: 
She scapes, and for the neighb'ring covert strives, 
And gaining shelter, doubts if yet she lives: 
If little things with great we may compare, 
Such was the God, and such the flying fair, 
She urg'd by fear, her feet did swiftly move, 
But he more swiftly, who was urg'd by love. 
He gathers ground upon her in the chace: 
Now breathes upon her hair, with nearer pace; 
And just is fast'ning on the wish'd embrace. 
The nymph grew pale, and in a mortal fright, 
Spent with the labour of so long a flight; 
And now despairing, cast a mournful look 
Upon the streams of her paternal brook; 
Oh help, she cry'd, in this extreamest need! 
If water Gods are deities indeed: 
Gape Earth, and this unhappy wretch intomb; 
Or change my form, whence all my sorrows come. 
Scarce had she finish'd, when her feet she found 
Benumb'd with cold, and fasten'd to the ground: 
A filmy rind about her body grows; 
Her hair to leaves, her arms extend to boughs: 
The nymph is all into a lawrel gone; 
The smoothness of her skin remains alone. 
Yet Phoebus loves her still, and casting round 
Her bole, his arms, some little warmth he found. 
The tree still panted in th' unfinish'd part: 
Not wholly vegetive, and heav'd her heart. 
He fixt his lips upon the trembling rind; 
It swerv'd aside, and his embrace declin'd. 
To whom the God, Because thou canst not be 
My mistress, I espouse thee for my tree: 
Be thou the prize of honour, and renown; 
The deathless poet, and the poem, crown. 
Thou shalt the Roman festivals adorn, 
And, after poets, be by victors worn. 
Thou shalt returning Caesar's triumph grace; 
When pomps shall in a long procession pass. 
Wreath'd on the posts before his palace wait; 
And be the sacred guardian of the gate. 
Secure from thunder, and unharm'd by Jove, 
Unfading as th' immortal Pow'rs above: 
And as the locks of Phoebus are unshorn, 
So shall perpetual green thy boughs adorn. 
The grateful tree was pleas'd with what he said; 
And shook the shady honours of her head. 

An ancient forest in Thessalia grows; 
Which Tempe's pleasing valley does inclose: 
Through this the rapid Peneus take his course; 
From Pindus rolling with impetuous force; 
Mists from the river's mighty fall arise: 
And deadly damps inclose the cloudy skies: 
Perpetual fogs are hanging o'er the wood; 
And sounds of waters deaf the neighbourhood. 
Deep, in a rocky cave, he makes abode 
(A mansion proper for a mourning God). 
Here he gives audience; issuing out decrees 
To rivers, his dependant deities. 
On this occasion hither they resort; 
To pay their homage, and to make their court. 
All doubtful, whether to congratulate 
His daughter's honour, or lament her fate. 
Sperchaeus, crown'd with poplar, first appears; 
Then old Apidanus came crown'd with years: 
Enipeus turbulent, Amphrysos tame; 
And Aeas last with lagging waters came. 
Then, of his kindred brooks, a num'rous throng 
Condole his loss; and bring their urns along. 
Not one was wanting of the wat'ry train, 
That fill'd his flood, or mingled with the main: 
But Inachus, who in his cave, alone, 
Wept not another's losses, but his own, 
For his dear Io, whether stray'd, or dead, 
To him uncertain, doubtful tears he shed. 
He sought her through the world; but sought in vain; 
And no where finding, rather fear'd her slain. 

Her, just returning from her father's brook, 
Jove had beheld, with a desiring look: 
And, Oh fair daughter of the flood, he said, 
Worthy alone of Jove's imperial bed, 
Happy whoever shall those charms possess; 
The king of Gods (nor is thy lover less) 
Invites thee to yon cooler shades; to shun 
The scorching rays of the meridian sun. 
Nor shalt thou tempt the dangers of the grove 
Alone, without a guide; thy guide is Jove. 
No puny Pow'r, but he whose high command 
Is unconfin'd, who rules the seas and land; 
And tempers thunder in his awful hand, 
Oh fly not: for she fled from his embrace 
O'er Lerna's pastures: he pursu'd the chace 
Along the shades of the Lyrcaean plain; 
At length the God, who never asks in vain, 
Involv'd with vapours, imitating night, 
Both Air, and Earth; and then suppress'd her flight, 
And mingling force with love, enjoy'd the full delight. 
Mean-time the jealous Juno, from on high, 
Survey'd the fruitful fields of Arcady; 
And wonder'd that the mist shou'd over-run 
The face of day-light, and obscure the sun. 
No nat'ral cause she found, from brooks, or bogs, 
Or marshy lowlands, to produce the fogs; 
Then round the skies she sought for Jupiter, 
Her faithless husband; but no Jove was there: 
Suspecting now the worst, Or I, she said, 
Am much mistaken, or am much betray'd. 
With fury she precipitates her flight: 
Dispels the shadows of dissembled night; 
And to the day restores his native light. 
Th' Almighty Leacher, careful to prevent 
The consequence, foreseeing her descent, 
Transforms his mistress in a trice; and now 
In Io's place appears a lovely cow. 
So sleek her skin, so faultless was her make, 
Ev'n Juno did unwilling pleasure take 
To see so fair a rival of her love; 
And what she was, and whence, enquir'd of Jove: 
Of what fair herd, and from what pedigree? 
The God, half caught, was forc'd upon a lye: 
And said she sprung from Earth. She took the word, 
And begg'd the beauteous heyfer of her lord. 
What should he do? 'twas equal shame to Jove 
Or to relinquish, or betray his love: 
Yet to refuse so slight a gift, wou'd be 
But more t' increase his consort's jealousie: 
Thus fear, and love, by turns, his heart assail'd; 
And stronger love had sure, at length, prevail'd: 
But some faint hope remain'd, his jealous queen 
Had not the mistress through the heyfer seen. 
The cautious Goddess, of her gift possest, 
Yet harbour'd anxious thoughts within her breast; 
As she who knew the falshood of her Jove; 
And justly fear'd some new relapse of love. 
Which to prevent, and to secure her care, 
To trusty Argus she commits the fair. 

The head of Argus (as with stars the skies) 
Was compass'd round, and wore an hundred eyes. 
But two by turns their lids in slumber steep; 
The rest on duty still their station keep; 
Nor cou'd the total constellation sleep. 
Thus, ever present, to his eyes, and mind, 
His charge was still before him, tho' behind. 
In fields he suffer'd her to feed by Day, 
But when the setting sun to night gave way, 
The captive cow he summon'd with a call; 
And drove her back, and ty'd her to the stall. 
On leaves of trees, and bitter herbs she fed, 
Heav'n was her canopy, bare earth her bed: 
So hardly lodg'd, and to digest her food, 
She drank from troubled streams, defil'd with mud. 
Her woeful story fain she wou'd have told, 
With hands upheld, but had no hands to hold. 
Her head to her ungentle keeper bow'd, 
She strove to speak, she spoke not, but she low'd: 
Affrighted with the noise, she look'd around, 
And seem'd t' inquire the author of the sound. 

Once on the banks where often she had play'd 
(Her father's banks), she came, and there survey'd 
Her alter'd visage, and her branching head; 
And starting, from her self she wou'd have fled. 
Her fellow nymphs, familiar to her eyes, 
Beheld, but knew her not in this disguise. 
Ev'n Inachus himself was ignorant; 
And in his daughter, did his daughter want. 
She follow'd where her fellows went, as she 
Were still a partner of the company: 
They stroak her neck; the gentle heyfer stands, 
And her neck offers to their stroaking hands. 
Her father gave her grass; the grass she took; 
And lick'd his palms, and cast a piteous look; 
And in the language of her eyes, she spoke. 
She wou'd have told her name, and ask'd relief, 
But wanting words, in tears she tells her grief. 
Which, with her foot she makes him understand; 
And prints the name of Io in the sand. 

Ah wretched me! her mournful father cry'd; 
She, with a sigh, to wretched me reply'd: 
About her milk-white neck, his arms he threw; 
And wept, and then these tender words ensue. 
And art thou she, whom I have sought around 
The world, and have at length so sadly found? 
So found, is worse than lost: with mutual words 
Thou answer'st not, no voice thy tongue affords: 
But sighs are deeply drawn from out thy breast; 
And speech deny'd, by lowing is express'd. 
Unknowing, I prepar'd thy bridal bed; 
With empty hopes of happy issue fed. 
But now the husband of a herd must be 
Thy mate, and bell'wing sons thy progeny. 
Oh, were I mortal, death might bring relief: 
But now my God-head but extends my grief: 
Prolongs my woes, of which no end I see, 
And makes me curse my immortality! 
More had he said, but fearful of her stay, 
The starry guardian drove his charge away, 
To some fresh pasture; on a hilly height 
He sate himself, and kept her still in sight. 

Now Jove no longer cou'd her suff'rings bear; 
But call'd in haste his airy messenger, 
The son of Maia, with severe decree 
To kill the keeper, and to set her free. 
With all his harness soon the God was sped, 
His flying hat was fastned on his head, 
Wings on his heels were hung, and in his hand 
He holds the vertue of the snaky wand. 
The liquid air his moving pinions wound, 
And, in the moment, shoot him on the ground. 
Before he came in sight, the crafty God 
His wings dismiss'd, but still retain'd his rod: 
That sleep-procuring wand wise Hermes took, 
But made it seem to sight a sherpherd's hook. 
With this, he did a herd of goats controul; 
Which by the way he met, and slily stole. 
Clad like a country swain, he pip'd, and sung; 
And playing, drove his jolly troop along. 

With pleasure, Argus the musician heeds; 
But wonders much at those new vocal reeds. 
And whosoe'er thou art, my friend, said he, 
Up hither drive thy goats, and play by me: 
This hill has browz for them, and shade for thee. 
The God, who was with ease induc'd to climb, 
Began discourse to pass away the time; 
And still betwixt, his tuneful pipe he plies; 
And watch'd his hour, to close the keeper's eyes. 
With much ado, he partly kept awake; 
Not suff'ring all his eyes repose to take: 
And ask'd the stranger, who did reeds invent, 
And whence began so rare an instrument? 

Then Hermes thus: A nymph of late there was 
Whose heav'nly form her fellows did surpass. 
The pride and joy of fair Arcadia's plains, 
Belov'd by deities, ador'd by swains: 
Syrinx her name, by Sylvans oft pursu'd, 
As oft she did the lustful Gods delude: 
The rural, and the woodland Pow'rs disdain'd; 
With Cynthia hunted, and her rites maintain'd: 
Like Phoebe clad, even Phoebe's self she seems, 
So tall, so streight, such well-proportion'd limbs: 
The nicest eye did no distinction know, 
But that the goddess bore a golden bow: 
Distinguish'd thus, the sight she cheated too. 
Descending from Lycaeus, Pan admires 
The matchless nymph, and burns with new desires. 
A crown of pine upon his head he wore; 
And thus began her pity to implore. 
But e'er he thus began, she took her flight 
So swift, she was already out of sight. 
Nor stay'd to hear the courtship of the God; 
But bent her course to Ladon's gentle flood: 
There by the river stopt, and tir'd before; 
Relief from water nymphs her pray'rs implore. 

Now while the lustful God, with speedy pace, 
Just thought to strain her in a strict embrace, 
He fill'd his arms with reeds, new rising on the place. 
And while he sighs, his ill success to find, 
The tender canes were shaken by the wind; 
And breath'd a mournful air, unheard before; 
That much surprizing Pan, yet pleas'd him more. 
Admiring this new musick, Thou, he said, 
Who canst not be the partner of my bed, 
At least shall be the confort of my mind: 
And often, often to my lips be joyn'd. 
He form'd the reeds, proportion'd as they are, 
Unequal in their length, and wax'd with care, 
They still retain the name of his ungrateful fair. 

While Hermes pip'd, and sung, and told his tale, 
The keeper's winking eyes began to fail, 
And drowsie slumber on the lids to creep; 
'Till all the watchman was at length asleep. 
Then soon the God his voice, and song supprest; 
And with his pow'rful rod confirm'd his rest: 
Without delay his crooked faulchion drew, 
And at one fatal stroke the keeper slew. 
Down from the rock fell the dissever'd head, 
Opening its eyes in death; and falling, bled; 
And mark'd the passage with a crimson trail: 
Thus Argus lies in pieces, cold, and pale; 
And all his hundred eyes, with all their light, 
Are clos'd at once, in one perpetual night. 
These Juno takes, that they no more may fail, 
And spreads them in her peacock's gaudy tail. 

Impatient to revenge her injur'd bed, 
She wreaks her anger on her rival's head; 
With Furies frights her from her native home; 
And drives her gadding, round the world to roam: 
Nor ceas'd her madness, and her flight, before 
She touch'd the limits of the Pharian shore. 
At length, arriving on the banks of Nile, 
Wearied with length of ways, and worn with toil, 
She laid her down; and leaning on her knees, 
Invok'd the cause of all her miseries: 
And cast her languishing regards above, 
For help from Heav'n, and her ungrateful Jove. 
She sigh'd, she wept, she low'd; 'twas all she cou'd; 
And with unkindness seem'd to tax the God. 
Last, with an humble pray'r, she beg'd repose, 
Or death at least, to finish all her woes. 
Jove heard her vows, and with a flatt'ring look, 
In her behalf to jealous Juno spoke, 
He cast his arms about her neck, and said, 
Dame, rest secure; no more thy nuptial bed 
This nymph shall violate; by Styx I swear, 
And every oath that binds the Thunderer. 
The Goddess was appeas'd; and at the word 
Was Io to her former shape restor'd. 
The rugged hair began to fall away; 
The sweetness of her eyes did only stay, 
Tho' not so large; her crooked horns decrease; 
The wideness of her jaws and nostrils cease: 
Her hoofs to hands return, in little space: 
The five long taper fingers take their place, 
And nothing of the heyfer now is seen, 
Beside the native whiteness of the skin. 
Erected on her feet she walks again: 
And two the duty of the four sustain. 
She tries her tongue; her silence softly breaks, 
And fears her former lowings when she speaks: 
A Goddess now, through all th' Aegyptian State: 
And serv'd by priests, who in white linnen wait. 

Her son was Epaphus, at length believ'd 
The son of Jove, and as a God receiv'd; 
With sacrifice ador'd, and publick pray'rs, 
He common temples with his mother shares. 
Equal in years, and rival in renown 
With Epaphus, the youthful Phaeton 
Like honour claims; and boasts his sire the sun. 
His haughty looks, and his assuming air, 
The son of Isis could no longer bear: 
Thou tak'st thy mother's word too far, said he, 
And hast usurp'd thy boasted pedigree. 
Go, base pretender to a borrow'd name. 
Thus tax'd, he blush'd with anger, and with shame; 
But shame repress'd his rage: the daunted youth 
Soon seeks his mother, and enquires the truth: 
Mother, said he, this infamy was thrown 
By Epaphus on you, and me your son. 
He spoke in publick, told it to my face; 
Nor durst I vindicate the dire disgrace: 
Even I, the bold, the sensible of wrong, 
Restrain'd by shame, was forc'd to hold my tongue. 
To hear an open slander, is a curse: 
But not to find an answer, is a worse. 
If I am Heav'n-begot, assert your son 
By some sure sign; and make my father known, 
To right my honour, and redeem your own. 
He said, and saying cast his arms about 
Her neck, and beg'd her to resolve the doubt. 

'Tis hard to judge if Clymene were mov'd 
More by his pray'r, whom she so dearly lov'd, 
Or more with fury fir'd, to find her name 
Traduc'd, and made the sport of common fame. 
She stretch'd her arms to Heav'n, and fix'd her eyes 
On that fair planet that adorns the skies; 
Now by those beams, said she, whose holy fires 
Consume my breast, and kindle my desires; 
By him, who sees us both, and clears our sight, 
By him, the publick minister of light, 
I swear that Sun begot thee; if I lye, 
Let him his chearful influence deny: 
Let him no more this perjur'd creature see; 
And shine on all the world but only me. 
If still you doubt your mother's innocence, 
His eastern mansion is not far from hence; 
With little pains you to his Leve go, 
And from himself your parentage may know. 
With joy th' ambitious youth his mother heard, 
And eager, for the journey soon prepar'd. 
He longs the world beneath him to survey; 
To guide the chariot; and to give the day: 
From Meroe's burning sands he bends his course, 
Nor less in India feels his father's force: 
His travel urging, till he came in sight; 
And saw the palace by the purple light. 

The Sun's bright palace, on high columns rais'd, 
With burnish'd gold and flaming jewels blaz'd; 
The folding gates diffus'd a silver light, 
And with a milder gleam refresh'd the sight; 
Of polish'd iv'ry was the cov'ring wrought: 
The matter vied not with the sculptor's thought, 
For in the portal was display'd on high 
(The work of Vulcan) a fictitious sky; 
A waving sea th' inferiour Earth embrac'd, 
And Gods and Goddesses the waters grac'd. 
Aegeon here a mighty whale bestrode; 
Triton, and Proteus (the deceiving God) 
With Doris here were carv'd, and all her train, 
Some loosely swimming in the figur'd main, 
While some on rocks their dropping hair divide, 
And some on fishes through the waters glide: 
Tho' various features did the sisters grace, 
A sister's likeness was in ev'ry face. 
On Earth a diff'rent landskip courts the eyes, 
Men, towns, and beasts in distant prospects rise, 
And nymphs, and streams, and woods, and rural deities. 
O'er all, the Heav'n's refulgent image shines; 
On either gate were six engraven signs. 

Here Phaeton still gaining on th' ascent, 
To his suspected father's palace went, 
'Till pressing forward through the bright abode, 
He saw at distance the illustrious God: 
He saw at distance, or the dazling light 
Had flash'd too strongly on his aking sight. 

The God sits high, exalted on a throne 
Of blazing gems, with purple garments on; 
The Hours, in order rang'd on either hand, 
And Days, and Months, and Years, and Ages stand. 
Here Spring appears with flow'ry chaplets bound; 
Here Summer in her wheaten garland crown'd; 
Here Autumn the rich trodden grapes besmear; 
And hoary Winter shivers in the reer. 

Phoebus beheld the youth from off his throne; 
That eye, which looks on all, was fix'd in one. 
He saw the boy's confusion in his face, 
Surpriz'd at all the wonders of the place; 
And cries aloud, "What wants my son? for know 
My son thou art, and I must call thee so." 
"Light of the world," the trembling youth replies, 
"Illustrious parent! since you don't despise 
The parent's name, some certain token give, 
That I may Clymene's proud boast believe, 
Nor longer under false reproaches grieve." 

The tender sire was touch'd with what he said, 
And flung the blaze of glories from his head, 
And bid the youth advance: "My son," said he, 
"Come to thy father's arms! for Clymene 
Has told thee true; a parent's name I own, 
And deem thee worthy to be called my son. 
As a sure proof, make some request, and I, 
Whate'er it be, with that request comply; 
By Styx I swear, whose waves are hid in night, 
And roul impervious to my piercing sight." 
The youth transported, asks, without delay, 
To guide the sun's bright chariot for a day. 

The God repented of the oath he took, 
For anguish thrice his radiant head he shook; 
"My son," says he, "some other proof require, 
Rash was my promise, rash is thy desire. 
I'd fain deny this wish, which thou hast made, 
Or, what I can't deny, wou'd fain disswade. 
Too vast and hazardous the task appears, 
Nor suited to thy strength, nor to thy years. 
Thy lot is mortal, but thy wishes fly 
Beyond the province of mortality: 
There is not one of all the Gods that dares 
(However skill'd in other great affairs) 
To mount the burning axle-tree, but I; 
Not Jove himself, the ruler of the sky, 
That hurles the three-fork'd thunder from above, 
Dares try his strength: yet who so strong as Jove? 
The steeds climb up the first ascent with pain, 
And when the middle firmament they gain, 
If downward from the Heav'ns my head I bow, 
And see the Earth and Ocean hang below, 
Ev'n I am seiz'd with horror and affright, 
And my own heart misgives me at the sight. 
A mighty downfal steeps the ev'ning stage, 
And steddy reins must curb the horses' rage. 
Tethys herself has fear'd to see me driv'n 
Down headlong from the precipice of Heav'n. 
Besides, consider what impetuous force 
Turns stars and planets in a diff'rent course. 
I steer against their motions; nor am I 
Born back by all the current of the sky. 
But how cou'd you resist the orbs that roul 
In adverse whirls, and stem the rapid pole? 
But you perhaps may hope for pleasing woods, 
And stately dooms, and cities fill'd with Gods; 
While through a thousand snares your progress lies, 
Where forms of starry monsters stock the skies: 
For, shou'd you hit the doubtful way aright, 
The bull with stooping horns stands opposite; 
Next him the bright Haemonian bow is strung, 
And next, the lion's grinning visage hung: 
The scorpion's claws, here clasp a wide extent; 
And here the crab's in lesser clasps are bent. 
Nor wou'd you find it easie to compose 
The mettled steeds, when from their nostrils flows 
The scorching fire, that in their entrails glows. 
Ev'n I their head-strong fury scarce restrain, 
When they grow warm and restif to the rein. 
Let not my son a fatal gift require, 
But, O! in time, recall your rash desire; 
You ask a gift that may your parent tell, 
Let these my fears your parentage reveal; 
And learn a father from a father's care: 
Look on my face; or if my heart lay bare, 
Cou'd you but look, you'd read the father there. 
Chuse out a gift from seas, or Earth, or skies, 
For open to your wish all Nature lies, 
Only decline this one unequal task, 
For 'tis a mischief, not a gift, you ask. 
You ask a real mischief, Phaeton: 
Nay hang not thus about my neck, my son: 
I grant your wish, and Styx has heard my voice, 
Chuse what you will, but make a wiser choice." 

Thus did the God th' unwary youth advise; 
But he still longs to travel through the skies. 
When the fond father (for in vain he pleads) 
At length to the Vulcanian Chariot leads. 
A golden axle did the work uphold, 
Gold was the beam, the wheels were orb'd with gold. 
The spokes in rows of silver pleas'd the sight, 
The seat with party-colour'd gems was bright; 
Apollo shin'd amid the glare of light. 
The youth with secret joy the work surveys, 
When now the moon disclos'd her purple rays; 
The stars were fled, for Lucifer had chased 
The stars away, and fled himself at last. 
Soon as the father saw the rosy morn, 
And the moon shining with a blunter horn, 
He bid the nimble Hours, without delay, 
Bring forth the steeds; the nimble Hours obey: 
From their full racks the gen'rous steeds retire, 
Dropping ambrosial foams, and snorting fire. 
Still anxious for his son, the God of day, 
To make him proof against the burning ray, 
His temples with celestial ointment wet, 
Of sov'reign virtue to repel the heat; 
Then fix'd the beamy circle on his head, 
And fetch'd a deep foreboding sigh, and said, 
"Take this at least, this last advice, my son, 
Keep a stiff rein, and move but gently on: 
The coursers of themselves will run too fast, 
Your art must be to moderate their haste. 
Drive 'em not on directly through the skies, 
But where the Zodiac's winding circle lies, 
Along the midmost Zone; but sally forth 
Nor to the distant south, nor stormy north. 
The horses' hoofs a beaten track will show, 
But neither mount too high, nor sink too low. 
That no new fires, or Heav'n or Earth infest; 
Keep the mid way, the middle way is best. 
Nor, where in radiant folds the serpent twines, 
Direct your course, nor where the altar shines. 
Shun both extreams; the rest let Fortune guide, 
And better for thee than thy self provide! 
See, while I speak, the shades disperse away, 
Aurora gives the promise of a day; 
I'm call'd, nor can I make a longer stay. 
Snatch up the reins; or still th' attempt forsake, 
And not my chariot, but my counsel, take, 
While yet securely on the Earth you stand; 
Nor touch the horses with too rash a hand. 
Let me alone to light the world, while you 
Enjoy those beams which you may safely view." 
He spoke in vain; the youth with active heat 
And sprightly vigour vaults into the seat; 
And joys to hold the reins, and fondly gives 
Those thanks his father with remorse receives. 

Mean-while the restless horses neigh'd aloud, 
Breathing out fire, and pawing where they stood. 
Tethys, not knowing what had past, gave way, 
And all the waste of Heav'n before 'em lay. 
They spring together out, and swiftly bear 
The flying youth thro' clouds and yielding air; 
With wingy speed outstrip the eastern wind, 
And leave the breezes of the morn behind. 
The youth was light, nor cou'd he fill the seat, 
Or poise the chariot with its wonted weight: 
But as at sea th' unballass'd vessel rides, 
Cast to and fro, the sport of winds and tides; 
So in the bounding chariot toss'd on high, 
The youth is hurry'd headlong through the sky. 
Soon as the steeds perceive it, they forsake 
Their stated course, and leave the beaten track. 
The youth was in a maze, nor did he know 
Which way to turn the reins, or where to go; 
Nor wou'd the horses, had he known, obey. 
Then the sev'n stars first felt Apollo's ray, 
And wish'd to dip in the forbidden sea. 
The folded serpent next the frozen pole, 
Stiff and benum'd before, began to rowle, 
And raged with inward heat, and threaten'd war, 
And shot a redder light from ev'ry star; 
Nay, and 'tis said Bootes too, that fain 
Thou woud'st have fled, tho' cumber'd with thy wane. 

Th' unhappy youth then, bending down his head, 
Saw Earth and Ocean far beneath him spread. 
His colour chang'd, he startled at the sight, 
And his eyes darken'd by too great a light. 
Now cou'd he wish the fiery steeds untry'd, 
His birth obscure, and his request deny'd: 
Now wou'd he Merops for his father own, 
And quit his boasted kindred to the sun. 

So fares the pilot, when his ship is tost 
In troubled seas, and all its steerage lost, 
He gives her to the winds, and in despair 
Seeks his last refuge in the Gods and pray'r. 

What cou'd he do? his eyes, if backward cast, 
Find a long path he had already past; 
If forward, still a longer path they find: 
Both he compares, and measures in his mind; 
And sometimes casts an eye upon the east, 
And sometimes looks on the forbidden west, 
The horses' names he knew not in the fright, 
Nor wou'd he loose the reins, nor cou'd he hold 'em right.

Now all the horrors of the Heav'ns he spies, 
And monstrous shadows of prodigious size, 
That, deck'd with stars, lye scatter'd o'er the skies. 
There is a place above, where Scorpio bent 
In tail and arms surrounds a vast extent; 
In a wide circuit of the Heav'ns he shines, 
And fills the space of two coelestial signs. 
Soon as the youth beheld him vex'd with heat 
Brandish his sting, and in his poison sweat, 
Half dead with sudden fear he dropt the reins; 
The horses felt 'em loose upon their mains, 
And, flying out through all the plains above, 
Ran uncontroul'd where-e're their fury drove; 
Rush'd on the stars, and through a pathless way 
Of unknown regions hurry'd on the day. 
And now above, and now below they flew, 
And near the Earth the burning chariot drew. 

The clouds disperse in fumes, the wond'ring Moon 
Beholds her brother's steeds beneath her own; 
The highlands smoak, cleft by the piercing rays, 
Or, clad with woods, in their own fewel blaze. 
Next o'er the plains, where ripen'd harvests grow, 
The running conflagration spreads below. 
But these are trivial ills: whole cities burn, 
And peopled kingdoms into ashes turn. 

The mountains kindle as the car draws near, 
Athos and Tmolus red with fires appear; 
Oeagrian Haemus (then a single name) 
And virgin Helicon increase the flame; 
Taurus and Oete glare amid the sky, 
And Ida, spight of all her fountains, dry. 
Eryx and Othrys, and Cithaeron, glow, 
And Rhodope, no longer cloath'd in snow; 
High Pindus, Mimas, and Parnassus, sweat, 
And Aetna rages with redoubled heat. 
Ev'n Scythia, through her hoary regions warm'd, 
In vain with all her native frost was arm'd. 
Cover'd with flames the tow'ring Appennine, 
And Caucasus, and proud Olympus, shine; 
And, where the long-extended Alpes aspire, 
Now stands a huge continu'd range of fire. 

Th' astonisht youth, where-e'er his eyes cou'd turn, 
Beheld the universe around him burn: 
The world was in a blaze; nor cou'd he bear 
The sultry vapours and the scorching air, 
Which from below, as from a furnace, flow'd; 
And now the axle-tree beneath him glow'd: 
Lost in the whirling clouds that round him broke, 
And white with ashes, hov'ring in the smoke. 
He flew where-e'er the horses drove, nor knew 
Whither the horses drove, or where he flew. 

'Twas then, they say, the swarthy Moor begun 
To change his hue, and blacken in the sun. 
Then Libya first, of all her moisture drain'd, 
Became a barren waste, a wild of sand. 
The water-nymphs lament their empty urns, 
Boeotia, robb's of silve Dirce, mourns, 
Corinth Pyrene's wasted spring bewails, 
And Argos grieves whilst Amymone fails. 

The floods are drain'd from ev'ry distant coast, 
Ev'n Tanais, tho' fix'd in ice, was lost. 
Enrag'd Caicus and Lycormas roar, 
And Xanthus, fated to be burnt once more. 
The fam'd Maeander, that unweary'd strays 
Through mazy windings, smoaks in ev'ry maze. 
From his lov'd Babylon Euphrates flies; 
The big-swoln Ganges and the Danube rise 
In thick'ning fumes, and darken half the skies. 
In flames Ismenos and the Phasis roul'd, 
And Tagus floating in his melted gold. 
The swans, that on Cayster often try'd 
Their tuneful songs, now sung their last and dy'd. 
The frighted Nile ran off, and under ground 
Conceal'd his head, nor can it yet be found: 
His sev'n divided currents all are dry, 
And where they row'ld, sev'n gaping trenches lye: 
No more the Rhine or Rhone their course maintain, 
Nor Tiber, of his promis'd empire vain. 

The ground, deep-cleft, admits the dazling ray, 
And startles Pluto with the flash of day. 
The seas shrink in, and to the sight disclose 
Wide naked plains, where once their billows rose; 
Their rocks are all discover'd, and increase 
The number of the scatter'd Cyclades. 
The fish in sholes about the bottom creep, 
Nor longer dares the crooked dolphin leap 
Gasping for breath, th' unshapen Phocae die, 
And on the boiling wave extended lye. 
Nereus, and Doris with her virgin train, 
Seek out the last recesses of the main; 
Beneath unfathomable depths they faint, 
And secret in their gloomy caverns pant. 
Stern Neptune thrice above the waves upheld 
His face, and thrice was by the flames repell'd. 

The Earth at length, on ev'ry side embrac'd 
With scalding seas that floated round her waste, 
When now she felt the springs and rivers come, 
And crowd within the hollow of her womb, 
Up-lifted to the Heav'ns her blasted head, 
And clapt her hand upon her brows, and said 
(But first, impatient of the sultry heat, 
Sunk deeper down, and sought a cooler seat): 
"If you, great king of Gods, my death approve, 
And I deserve it, let me die by Jove; 
If I must perish by the force of fire, 
Let me transfix'd with thunder-bolts expire. 
See, whilst I speak, my breath the vapours choak 
(For now her face lay wrapt in clouds of smoak), 
See my singe'd hair, behold my faded eye, 
And wither'd face, where heaps of cinders lye! 
And does the plow for this my body tear? 
This the reward for all the fruits I bear, 
Tortur'd with rakes, and harrass'd all the year? 
That herbs for cattle daily I renew, 
And food for Man, and frankincense for you? 
But grant me guilty; what has Neptune done? 
Why are his waters boiling in the sun? 
The wavy empire, which by lot was giv'n, 
Why does it waste, and further shrink from Heav'n? 
If I nor he your pity can provoke, 
See your own Heav'ns, the Heav'ns begin to smoke! 
Shou'd once the sparkles catch those bright abodes, 
Destruction seizes on the Heav'ns and Gods; 
Atlas becomes unequal to his freight, 
And almost faints beneath the glowing weight. 
If Heav'n, and Earth, and sea, together burn, 
All must again into their chaos turn. 
Apply some speedy cure, prevent our fate, 
And succour Nature, ere it be too late." 
She cea'sd, for choak'd with vapours round her spread, 
Down to the deepest shades she sunk her head. 

Jove call'd to witness ev'ry Pow'r above, 
And ev'n the God, whose son the chariot drove, 
That what he acts he is compell'd to do, 
Or universal ruin must ensue. 
Strait he ascends the high aetherial throne, 
From whence he us'd to dart his thunder down, 
From whence his show'rs and storms he us'd to pour, 
But now cou'd meet with neither storm nor show'r. 
Then, aiming at the youth, with lifted hand, 
Full at his head he hurl'd the forky brand, 
In dreadful thund'rings. Thus th' almighty sire 
Suppress'd the raging of the fires with fire. 

At once from life and from the chariot driv'n, 
Th' ambitious boy fell thunder-struck from Heav'n. 
The horses started with a sudden bound, 
And flung the reins and chariot to the ground: 
The studded harness from their necks they broke, 
Here fell a wheel, and here a silver spoke, 
Here were the beam and axle torn away; 
And, scatter'd o'er the Earth, the shining fragments lay.

The breathless Phaeton, with flaming hair, 
Shot from the chariot, like a falling star, 
That in a summer's ev'ning from the top 
Of Heav'n drops down, or seems at least to drop; 
'Till on the Po his blasted corps was hurl'd, 
Far from his country, in the western world. 

The Latian nymphs came round him, and, amaz'd, 
On the dead youth, transfix'd with thunder, gaz'd; 
And, whilst yet smoaking from the bolt he lay, 
His shatter'd body to a tomb convey, 
And o'er the tomb an epitaph devise: 
"Here he, who drove the sun's bright chariot, lies; 
His father's fiery steeds he cou'd not guide, 
But in the glorious enterprize he dy'd." 

Apollo hid his face, and pin'd for grief, 
And, if the story may deserve belief, 
The space of one whole day is said to run, 
From morn to wonted ev'n, without a sun: 
The burning ruins, with a fainter ray, 
Supply the sun, and counterfeit a day, 
A day, that still did Nature's face disclose: 
This comfort from the mighty mischief rose. 

But Clymene, enrag'd with grief, laments, 
And as her grief inspires, her passion vents: 
Wild for her son, and frantick in her woes, 
With hair dishevel'd round the world she goes, 
To seek where-e'er his body might be cast; 
'Till, on the borders of the Po, at last 
The name inscrib'd on the new tomb appears. 
The dear dear name she bathes in flowing tears, 
Hangs o'er the tomb, unable to depart, 
And hugs the marble to her throbbing heart. 

Her daughters too lament, and sigh, and mourn 
(A fruitless tribute to their brother's urn), 
And beat their naked bosoms, and complain, 
And call aloud for Phaeton in vain: 
All the long night their mournful watch they keep, 
And all the day stand round the tomb, and weep. 

Four times, revolving, the full moon return'd; 
So long the mother and the daughters mourn'd: 
When now the eldest, Phaethusa, strove 
To rest her weary limbs, but could not move; 
Lampetia wou'd have help'd her, but she found 
Her self with-held, and rooted to the ground: 
A third in wild affliction, as she grieves, 
Wou'd rend her hair, but fills her hands with leaves; 
One sees her thighs transform'd, another views 
Her arms shot out, and branching into boughs. 
And now their legs, and breasts, and bodies stood 
Crusted with bark, and hard'ning into wood; 
But still above were female heads display'd, 
And mouths, that call'd the mother to their aid. 
What cou'd, alas! the weeping mother do? 
From this to that with eager haste she flew, 
And kiss'd her sprouting daughters as they grew. 
She tears the bark that to each body cleaves, 
And from their verdant fingers strips the leaves: 
The blood came trickling, where she tore away 
The leaves and bark: the maids were heard to say, 
"Forbear, mistaken parent, oh! forbear; 
A wounded daughter in each tree you tear; 
Farewell for ever." Here the bark encreas'd, 
Clos'd on their faces, and their words suppress'd. 

The new-made trees in tears of amber run, 
Which, harden'd into value by the sun, 
Distill for ever on the streams below: 
The limpid streams their radiant treasure show, 
Mixt in the sand; whence the rich drops convey'd 
Shine in the dress of the bright Latian maid. 

Cycnus beheld the nymphs transform'd, ally'd 
To their dead brother on the mortal side, 
In friendship and affection nearer bound; 
He left the cities and the realms he own'd, 
Thro' pathless fields and lonely shores to range, 
And woods made thicker by the sisters' change. 
Whilst here, within the dismal gloom, alone, 
The melancholy monarch made his moan, 
His voice was lessen'd, as he try'd to speak, 
And issu'd through a long-extended neck; 
His hair transforms to down, his fingers meet 
In skinny films, and shape his oary feet; 
From both his sides the wings and feathers break; 
And from his mouth proceeds a blunted beak: 
All Cycnus now into a Swan was turn'd, 
Who, still remembring how his kinsman burn'd, 
To solitary pools and lakes retires, 
And loves the waters as oppos'd to fires. 

Mean-while Apollo in a gloomy shade 
(The native lustre of his brows decay'd) 
Indulging sorrow, sickens at the sight 
Of his own sun-shine, and abhors the light; 
The hidden griefs, that in his bosom rise, 
Sadden his looks and over-cast his eyes, 
As when some dusky orb obstructs his ray, 
And sullies in a dim eclipse the day. 

Now secretly with inward griefs he pin'd, 
Now warm resentments to his griefs he joyn'd, 
And now renounc'd his office to mankind. 
"Ere since the birth of time," said he, "I've born 
A long ungrateful toil, without return; 
Let now some other manage, if he dare, 
The fiery steeds, and mount the burning carr; 
Or, if none else, let Jove his fortune try, 
And learn to lay his murd'ring thunder by; 
Then will he own, perhaps, but own too late, 
My son deserv'd not so severe a fate." 

The Gods stand round him, as he mourns, and pray 
He would resume the conduct of the day, 
Nor let the world be lost in endless night: 
Jove too himself descending from his height, 
Excuses what had happen'd, and intreats, 
Majestically mixing pray'rs and threats. 
Prevail'd upon at length, again he took 
The harness'd steeds, that still with horror shook, 
And plies 'em with the lash, and whips 'em on, 
And, as he whips, upbraids 'em with his son. 

The day was settled in its course; and Jove 
Walk'd the wide circuit of the Heavens above, 
To search if any cracks or flaws were made; 
But all was safe: the Earth he then survey'd, 
And cast an eye on ev'ry diff'rent coast, 
And ev'ry land; but on Arcadia most. 
Her fields he cloath'd, and chear'd her blasted face 
With running fountains, and with springing grass. 
No tracks of Heav'n's destructive fire remain, 
The fields and woods revive, and Nature smiles again. 

But as the God walk'd to and fro the Earth, 
And rais'd the plants, and gave the spring its birth, 
By chance a fair Arcadian nymph he view'd, 
And felt the lovely charmer in his blood. 
The nymph nor spun, nor dress'd with artful pride, 
Her vest was gather'd up, her hair was ty'd; 
Now in her hand a slender spear she bore, 
Now a light quiver on her shoulders wore; 
To chaste Diana from her youth inclin'd, 
The sprightly warriors of the wood she joyn'd. 
Diana too the gentle huntress lov'd, 
Nor was there one of all the nymphs that rov'd 
O'er Maenalus, amid the maiden throng, 
More favour'd once; but favour lasts not long. 

The sun now shone in all its strength, and drove 
The heated virgin panting to a grove; 
The grove around a grateful shadow cast: 
She dropt her arrows, and her bow unbrac'd; 
She flung her self on the cool grassy bed; 
And on the painted quiver rais'd her head, 
Jove saw the charming huntress unprepar'd, 
Stretch'd on the verdant turf, without a guard. 
"Here I am safe," he cries, "from Juno's eye; 
Or shou'd my jealous queen the theft descry, 
Yet wou'd I venture on a theft like this, 
And stand her rage for such, for such a bliss!" 
Diana's shape and habit strait he took, 
Soften'd his brows, and smooth'd his awful look, 
And mildly in a female accent spoke. 
"How fares my girl? How went the morning chase?" 
To whom the virgin, starting from the grass, 
"All hail, bright deity, whom I prefer 
To Jove himself, tho' Jove himself were here." 
The God was nearer than she thought, and heard 
Well-pleas'd himself before himself preferr'd. 

He then salutes her with a warm embrace; 
And, e're she half had told the morning chase, 
With love enflam'd, and eager on his bliss, 
Smother'd her words, and stop'd her with a kiss; 
His kisses with unwonted ardour glow'd, 
Nor cou'd Diana's shape conceal the God. 
The virgin did whate'er a virgin cou'd 
(Sure Juno must have pardon'd, had she view'd); 
With all her might against his force she strove; 
But how can mortal maids contend with Jove? 

Possest at length of what his heart desir'd, 
Back to his Heav'ns, th' exulting God retir'd. 
The lovely huntress, rising from the grass, 
With down-cast eyes, and with a blushing face, 
By shame confounded, and by fear dismay'd, 
Flew from the covert of the guilty shade, 
And almost, in the tumult of her mind, 
Left her forgotten bow and shafts behind. 

But now Diana, with a sprightly train 
Of quiver'd virgins, bounding o'er the plain, 
Call'd to the nymph; the nymph began to fear 
A second fraud, a Jove disguis'd in her; 
But, when she saw the sister nymphs, suppress'd 
Her rising fears, and mingled with the rest. 

How in the look does conscious guilt appear! 
Slowly she mov'd, and loiter'd in the rear; 
Nor lightly tripp'd, nor by the Goddess ran, 
As once she us'd, the foremost of the train. 
Her looks were flush'd, and sullen was her mien, 
That sure the virgin Goddess (had she been 
Aught but a virgin) must the guilt have seen. 
'Tis said the nymphs saw all, and guess'd aright: 
And now the moon had nine times lost her light, 
When Dian, fainting in the mid-day beams, 
Found a cool covert, and refreshing streams 
That in soft murmurs through the forest flow'd, 
And a smooth bed of shining gravel show'd. 

A covert so obscure, and streams so clear, 
The Goddess prais'd: "And now no spies are near 
Let's strip, my gentle maids, and wash," she cries. 
Pleas'd with the motion, every maid complies; 
Only the blushing huntress stood confus'd, 
And form'd delays, and her delays excus'd; 
In vain excus'd: her fellows round her press'd, 
And the reluctant nymph by force undress'd, 
The naked huntress all her shame reveal'd, 
In vain her hands the pregnant womb conceal'd; 
"Begone!" the Goddess cries with stern disdain, 
"Begone! nor dare the hallow'd stream to stain": 
She fled, for ever banish'd from the train. 

This Juno heard, who long had watch'd her time 
To punish the detested rival's crime; 
The time was come; for, to enrage her more, 
A lovely boy the teeming rival bore. 

The Goddess cast a furious look, and cry'd, 
"It is enough! I'm fully satisfy'd! 
This boy shall stand a living mark, to prove 
My husband's baseness and the strumpet's love: 
But vengeance shall awake: those guilty charms 
That drew the Thunderer from Juno's arms, 
No longer shall their wonted force retain, 
Nor please the God, nor make the mortal vain." 

This said, her hand within her hair she wound, 
Swung her to Earth, and drag'd her on the ground: 
The prostrate wretch lifts up her arms in pray'r; 
Her arms grow shaggy, and deform'd with hair, 
Her nails are sharpen'd into pointed claws, 
Her hands bear half her weight, and turn to paws; 
Her lips, that once cou'd tempt a God, begin 
To grow distorted in an ugly grin. 
And, lest the supplicating brute might reach 
The ears of Jove, she was depriv'd of speech: 
Her surly voice thro' a hoarse passage came 
In savage sounds: her mind was still the same, 
The furry monster fix'd her eyes above, 
And heav'd her new unwieldy paws to Jove, 
And beg'd his aid with inward groans; and tho' 
She could not call him false, she thought him so. 

How did she fear to lodge in woods alone, 
And haunt the fields and meadows, once her own! 
How often wou'd the deep-mouth'd dogs pursue, 
Whilst from her hounds the frighted huntress flew! 
How did she fear her fellow-brutes, and shun 
The shaggy bear, tho' now her self was one! 
How from the sight of rugged wolves retire, 
Although the grim Lycaon was her sire! 

But now her son had fifteen summers told, 
Fierce at the chase, and in the forest bold; 
When, as he beat the woods in quest of prey, 
He chanc'd to rouze his mother where she lay. 
She knew her son, and kept him in her sight, 
And fondly gaz'd: the boy was in a fright, 
And aim'd a pointed arrow at her breast, 
And would have slain his mother in the beast; 
But Jove forbad, and snatch'd 'em through the air 
In whirlwinds up to Heav'n, and fix'd 'em there! 
Where the new constellations nightly rise, 
And add a lustre to the northern skies. 

When Juno saw the rival in her height, 
Spangled with stars, and circled round with light, 
She sought old Ocean in his deep abodes, 
And Tethys, both rever'd among the Gods. 
They ask what brings her there: "Ne'er ask," says she, 
"What brings me here, Heav'n is no place for me. 
You'll see, when night has cover'd all things o'er, 
Jove's starry bastard and triumphant whore 
Usurp the Heav'ns; you'll see 'em proudly rowle 
And who shall now on Juno's altars wait, 
When those she hates grow greater by her hate? 
I on the nymph a brutal form impress'd, 
Jove to a goddess has transform'd the beast; 
This, this was all my weak revenge could do: 
But let the God his chaste amours pursue, 
And, as he acted after Io's rape, 
Restore th' adultress to her former shape; 
Then may he cast his Juno off, and lead 
The great Lycaon's offspring to his bed. 
But you, ye venerable Pow'rs, be kind, 
And, if my wrongs a due resentment find, 
Receive not in your waves their setting beams, 
Nor let the glaring strumpet taint your streams." 

The Goddess ended, and her wish was giv'n. 
Back she return'd in triumph up to Heav'n; 
Her gawdy peacocks drew her through the skies. 
Their tails were spotted with a thousand eyes; 
The eyes of Argus on their tails were rang'd, 
At the same time the raven's colour chang'd. 

The raven once in snowy plumes was drest, 
White as the whitest dove's unsully'd breast, 
Fair as the guardian of the Capitol, 
Soft as the swan; a large and lovely fowl; 
His tongue, his prating tongue had chang'd him quite 
To sooty blackness, from the purest white. 

The story of his change shall here be told; 
In Thessaly there liv'd a nymph of old, 
Coronis nam'd; a peerless maid she shin'd, 
Confest the fairest of the fairer kind. 
Apollo lov'd her, 'till her guilt he knew, 
While true she was, or whilst he thought her true. 
But his own bird the raven chanc'd to find 
The false one with a secret rival joyn'd. 
Coronis begg'd him to suppress the tale, 
But could not with repeated pray'rs prevail. 
His milk-white pinions to the God he ply'd; 
The busy daw flew with him, side by side, 
And by a thousand teizing questions drew 
Th' important secret from him as they flew. 
The daw gave honest counsel, tho' despis'd, 
And, tedious in her tattle, thus advis'd: 
"Stay, silly bird, th' ill-natur'd task refuse, 
Nor be the bearer of unwelcome news. 
Be warn'd by my example: you discern 
What now I am, and what I was shall learn. 
My foolish honesty was all my crime; 
Then hear my story. Once upon a time, 
The two-shap'd Ericthonius had his birth 
(Without a mother) from the teeming Earth; 
Minerva nurs'd him, and the infant laid 
Within a chest, of twining osiers made. 
The daughters of king Cecrops undertook 
To guard the chest, commanded not to look 
On what was hid within. I stood to see 
The charge obey'd, perch'd on a neighb'ring tree. 
The sisters Pandrosos and Herse keep 
The strict command; Aglauros needs would peep, 
And saw the monstrous infant, in a fright, 
And call'd her sisters to the hideous sight: 
A boy's soft shape did to the waste prevail, 
But the boy ended in a dragon's tail. 
I told the stern Minerva all that pass'd; 
But for my pains, discarded and disgrac'd, 
The frowning Goddess drove me from her sight, 
And for her fav'rite chose the bird of night. 
Be then no tell-tale; for I think my wrong 
Enough to teach a bird to hold her tongue. 

But you, perhaps, may think I was remov'd, 
As never by the heav'nly maid belov'd: 
But I was lov'd; ask Pallas if I lye; 
Tho' Pallas hate me now, she won't deny: 
For I, whom in a feather'd shape you view, 
Was once a maid (by Heav'n the story's true) 
A blooming maid, and a king's daughter too. 
A crowd of lovers own'd my beauty's charms; 
My beauty was the cause of all my harms; 
Neptune, as on his shores I wont to rove, 
Observ'd me in my walks, and fell in love. 
He made his courtship, he confess'd his pain, 
And offer'd force, when all his arts were vain; 
Swift he pursu'd: I ran along the strand, 
'Till, spent and weary'd on the sinking sand, 
I shriek'd aloud, with cries I fill'd the air 
To Gods and men; nor God nor man was there: 
A virgin Goddess heard a virgin's pray'r. 
For, as my arms I lifted to the skies, 
I saw black feathers from my fingers rise; 
I strove to fling my garment on the ground; 
My garment turn'd to plumes, and girt me round: 
My hands to beat my naked bosom try; 
Nor naked bosom now nor hands had I: 
Lightly I tript, nor weary as before 
Sunk in the sand, but skim'd along the shore; 
'Till, rising on my wings, I was preferr'd 
To be the chaste Minerva's virgin bird: 
Preferr'd in vain! I am now in disgrace: 
Nyctimene the owl enjoys my place. 

On her incestuous life I need not dwell 
(In Lesbos still the horrid tale they tell), 
And of her dire amours you must have heard, 
For which she now does penance in a bird, 
That conscious of her shame, avoids the light, 
And loves the gloomy cov'ring of the night; 
The birds, where-e'er she flutters, scare away 
The hooting wretch, and drive her from the day." 

The raven, urg'd by such impertinence, 
Grew passionate, it seems, and took offence, 
And curst the harmless daw; the daw withdrew: 
The raven to her injur'd patron flew, 
And found him out, and told the fatal truth 
Of false Coronis and the favour'd youth. 

The God was wroth, the colour left his look, 
The wreath his head, the harp his hand forsook: 
His silver bow and feather'd shafts he took, 
And lodg'd an arrow in the tender breast, 
That had so often to his own been prest. 
Down fell the wounded nymph, and sadly groan'd, 
And pull'd his arrow reeking from the wound; 
And weltring in her blood, thus faintly cry'd, 
"Ah cruel God! tho' I have justly dy'd, 
What has, alas! my unborn infant done, 
That he should fall, and two expire in one?" 
This said, in agonies she fetch'd her breath. 

The God dissolves in pity at her death; 
He hates the bird that made her falshood known, 
And hates himself for what himself had done; 
The feather'd shaft, that sent her to the Fates, 
And his own hand, that sent the shaft, he hates. 
Fain would he heal the wound, and ease her pain, 
And tries the compass of his art in vain. 
Soon as he saw the lovely nymph expire, 
The pile made ready, and the kindling fire. 
With sighs and groans her obsequies he kept, 
And, if a God could weep, the God had wept. 
Her corps he kiss'd, and heav'nly incense brought, 
And solemniz'd the death himself had wrought. 

But lest his offspring should her fate partake, 
Spight of th' immortal mixture in his make, 
He ript her womb, and set the child at large, 
And gave him to the centaur Chiron's charge: 
Then in his fury black'd the raven o'er, 
And bid him prate in his white plumes no more. 

Old Chiron took the babe with secret joy, 
Proud of the charge of the celestial boy. 
His daughter too, whom on the sandy shore 
The nymph Charicle to the centaur bore, 
With hair dishevel'd on her shoulders, came 
To see the child, Ocyrrhoe was her name; 
She knew her father's arts, and could rehearse 
The depths of prophecy in sounding verse. 
Once, as the sacred infant she survey'd, 
The God was kindled in the raving maid, 
And thus she utter'd her prophetick tale: 
"Hail, great physician of the world, all-hail; 
Hail, mighty infant, who in years to come 
Shalt heal the nations, and defraud the tomb; 
Swift be thy growth! thy triumphs unconfin'd! 
Make kingdoms thicker, and increase mankind. 
Thy daring art shall animate the dead, 
And draw the thunder on thy guilty head: 
Then shalt thou dye, but from the dark abode 
Rise up victorious, and be twice a God. 
And thou, my sire, not destin'd by thy birth 
To turn to dust, and mix with common earth, 
How wilt thou toss, and rave, and long to dye, 
And quit thy claim to immortality; 
When thou shalt feel, enrag'd with inward pains, 
The Hydra's venom rankling in thy veins? 
The Gods, in pity, shall contract thy date, 
And give thee over to the pow'r of Fate." 

Thus entring into destiny, the maid 
The secrets of offended Jove betray'd: 
More had she still to say; but now appears 
Oppress'd with sobs and sighs, and drown'd in tears. 
"My voice," says she, "is gone, my language fails; 
Through ev'ry limb my kindred shape prevails: 
Why did the God this fatal gift impart, 
And with prophetick raptures swell my heart! 
What new desires are these? I long to pace 
O'er flow'ry meadows, and to feed on grass; 
I hasten to a brute, a maid no more; 
But why, alas! am I transform'd all o'er? 
My sire does half a human shape retain, 
And in his upper parts preserve the man." 

Her tongue no more distinct complaints affords, 
But in shrill accents and mis-shapen words 
Pours forth such hideous wailings, as declare 
The human form confounded in the mare: 
'Till by degrees accomplish'd in the beast, 
She neigh'd outright, and all the steed exprest. 
Her stooping body on her hands is born, 
Her hands are turn'd to hoofs, and shod in horn, 
Her yellow tresses ruffle in a mane, 
And in a flowing tail she frisks her train, 
The mare was finish'd in her voice and look, 
And a new name from the new figure took. 

Sore wept the centuar, and to Phoebus pray'd; 
But how could Phoebus give the centaur aid? 
Degraded of his pow'r by angry Jove, 
In Elis then a herd of beeves he drove; 
And wielded in his hand a staff of oak, 
And o'er his shoulders threw the shepherd's cloak; 
On sev'n compacted reeds he us'd to play, 
And on his rural pipe to waste the day. 

As once attentive to his pipe he play'd, 
The crafty Hermes from the God convey'd 
A drove, that sep'rate from their fellows stray'd. 
The theft an old insidious peasant view'd 
(They call'd him Battus in the neighbourhood), 
Hir'd by a vealthy Pylian prince to feed 
His fav'rite mares, and watch the gen'rous breed. 
The thievish God suspected him, and took 
The hind aside, and thus in whispers spoke: 
"Discover not the theft, whoe'er thou be, 
And take that milk-white heifer for thy fee." 
"Go, stranger," cries the clown, "securely on, 
That stone shall sooner tell," and show'd a stone. 

The God withdrew, but strait return'd again, 
In speech and habit like a country swain; 
And cries out, "Neighbour, hast thou seen a stray 
Of bullocks and of heifers pass this way? 
In the recov'ry of my cattle join, 
A bullock and a heifer shall be thine." 
The peasant quick replies, "You'll find 'em there 
In yon dark vale"; and in the vale they were. 
The double bribe had his false heart beguil'd: 
The God, successful in the tryal, smil'd; 
"And dost thou thus betray my self to me? 
Me to my self dost thou betray?" says he: 
Then to a Touch stone turns the faithless spy; 
And in his name records his infamy. 

This done, the God flew up on high, and pass'd 
O'er lofty Athens, by Minerva grac'd, 
And wide Munichia, whilst his eyes survey 
All the vast region that beneath him lay. 

'Twas now the feast, when each Athenian maid 
Her yearly homage to Minerva paid; 
In canisters, with garlands cover'd o'er, 
High on their heads, their mystick gifts they bore: 
And now, returning in a solemn train, 
The troop of shining virgins fill'd the plain. 

The God well pleas'd beheld the pompous show, 
And saw the bright procession pass below; 
Then veer'd about, and took a wheeling flight, 
And hover'd o'er them: as the spreading kite, 
That smells the slaughter'd victim from on high, 
Flies at a distance, if the priests are nigh, 
And sails around, and keeps it in her eye: 
So kept the God the virgin quire in view, 
And in slow winding circles round them flew. 

As Lucifer excells the meanest star, 
Or, as the full-orb'd Phoebe, Lucifer; 
So much did Herse all the rest outvy, 
And gave a grace to the solemnity. 
Hermes was fir'd, as in the clouds he hung: 
So the cold bullet, that with fury slung 
From Balearick engines mounts on high, 
Glows in the whirl, and burns along the sky. 
At length he pitch'd upon the ground, and show'd 
The form divine, the features of a God. 
He knew their vertue o'er a female heart, 
And yet he strives to better them by art. 
He hangs his mantle loose, and sets to show 
The golden edging on the seam below; 
Adjusts his flowing curls, and in his hand 
Waves, with an air, the sleep-procuring wand; 
The glitt'ring sandals to his feet applies, 
And to each heel the well-trim'd pinion ties. 

His ornaments with nicest art display'd, 
He seeks th' apartment of the royal maid. 
The roof was all with polish'd iv'ry lin'd, 
That richly mix'd, in clouds of tortoise shin'd. 
Three rooms, contiguous, in a range were plac'd, 
The midmost by the beauteous Herse grac'd; 
Her virgin sisters lodg'd on either side. 
Aglauros first th' approaching God descry'd, 
And, as he cross'd her chamber, ask'd his name, 
And what his business was, and whence he came. 
"I come," reply'd the God, "from Heav'n, to woo 
Your sister, and to make an aunt of you; 
I am the son and messenger of Jove; 
My name is Mercury, my bus'ness love; 
Do you, kind damsel, take a lover's part, 
And gain admittance to your sister's heart." 

She star'd him in the face with looks amaz'd, 
As when she on Minerva's secret gaz'd, 
And asks a mighty treasure for her hire; 
And, 'till he brings it, makes the God retire. 
Minerva griev'd to see the nymph succeed; 
And now remembring the late impious deed, 
When, disobedient to her strict command, 
She touch'd the chest with an unhallow'd hand; 
In big-swoln sighs her inward rage express'd, 
That heav'd the rising Aegis on her breast; 
Then sought out Envy in her dark abode, 
Defil'd with ropy gore and clots of blood: 
Shut from the winds, and from the wholesome skies, 
In a deep vale the gloomy dungeon lies, 
Dismal and cold, where not a beam of light 
Invades the winter, or disturbs the night. 

Directly to the cave her course she steer'd; 
Against the gates her martial lance she rear'd; 
The gates flew open, and the fiend appear'd. 
A pois'nous morsel in her teeth she chew'd, 
And gorg'd the flesh of vipers for her food. 
Minerva loathing turn'd away her eye; 
The hideous monster, rising heavily, 
Came stalking forward with a sullen pace, 
And left her mangled offals on the place. 
Soon as she saw the goddess gay and bright, 
She fetch'd a groan at such a chearful sight. 
Livid and meagre were her looks, her eye 
In foul distorted glances turn'd awry; 
A hoard of gall her inward parts possess'd, 
And spread a greenness o'er her canker'd breast; 
Her teeth were brown with rust, and from her tongue, 
In dangling drops, the stringy poison hung. 
She never smiles but when the wretched weep, 
Nor lulls her malice with a moment's sleep, 
Restless in spite: while watchful to destroy, 
She pines and sickens at another's joy; 
Foe to her self, distressing and distrest, 
She bears her own tormentor in her breast. 
The Goddess gave (for she abhorr'd her sight) 
A short command: "To Athens speed thy flight; 
On curst Aglauros try thy utmost art, 
And fix thy rankest venoms in her heart." 
This said, her spear she push'd against the ground, 
And mounting from it with an active bound, 
Flew off to Heav'n: the hag with eyes askew 
Look'd up, and mutter'd curses as she flew; 
For sore she fretted, and began to grieve 
At the success which she her self must give. 
Then takes her staff, hung round with wreaths of thorn, 
And sails along, in a black whirlwind born, 
O'er fields and flow'ry meadows: where she steers 
Her baneful course, a mighty blast appears, 
Mildews and blights; the meadows are defac'd, 
The fields, the flow'rs, and the whole years laid waste:

On mortals next, and peopled towns she falls, 
And breathes a burning plague among their walls. 

When Athens she beheld, for arts renown'd, 
With peace made happy, and with plenty crown'd, 
Scarce could the hideous fiend from tears forbear, 
To find out nothing that deserv'd a tear. 
Th' apartment now she enter'd, where at rest 
Aglauros lay, with gentle sleep opprest. 
To execute Minerva's dire command, 
She stroak'd the virgin with her canker'd hand, 
Then prickly thorns into her breast convey'd, 
That stung to madness the devoted maid: 
Her subtle venom still improves the smart, 
Frets in the blood, and festers in the heart. 

To make the work more sure, a scene she drew, 
And plac'd before the dreaming virgin's view 
Her sister's marriage, and her glorious fate: 
Th' imaginary bride appears in state; 
The bride-groom with unwonted beauty glows: 
For envy magnifies what-e'er she shows. 

Full of the dream, Aglauros pin'd away 
In tears all night, in darkness all the day; 
Consum'd like ice, that just begins to run, 
When feebly smitten by the distant sun; 
Or like unwholsome weeds, that set on fire 
Are slowly wasted, and in smoke expire. 
Giv'n up to envy (for in ev'ry thought 
The thorns, the venom, and the vision wrought) 
Oft did she call on death, as oft decreed, 
Rather than see her sister's wish succeed, 
To tell her awfull father what had past: 
At length before the door her self she cast; 
And, sitting on the ground with sullen pride, 
A passage to the love-sick God deny'd. 
The God caress'd, and for admission pray'd, 
And sooth'd in softest words th' envenom'd maid. 
In vain he sooth'd: "Begone!" the maid replies, 
"Or here I keep my seat, and never rise." 
"Then keep thy seat for ever," cries the God, 
And touch'd the door, wide op'ning to his rod. 
Fain would she rise, and stop him, but she found 
Her trunk too heavy to forsake the ground; 
Her joynts are all benum'd, her hands are pale, 
And marble now appears in ev'ry nail. 
As when a cancer in the body feeds, 
And gradual death from limb to limb proceeds; 
So does the chilness to each vital parte 
Spread by degrees, and creeps into her heart; 
'Till hard'ning ev'ry where, and speechless grown, 
She sits unmov'd, and freezes to a stone. 
But still her envious hue and sullen mien 
Are in the sedentary figure seen. 

When now the God his fury had allay'd, 
And taken vengeance of the stubborn maid, 
From where the bright Athenian turrets rise 
He mounts aloft, and re-ascends the skies. 
Jove saw him enter the sublime abodes, 
And, as he mix'd among the crowd of Gods, 
Beckon'd him out, and drew him from the rest, 
And in soft whispers thus his will exprest. 

"My trusty Hermes, by whose ready aid 
Thy sire's commands are through the world convey'd. 
Resume thy wings, exert their utmost force, 
And to the walls of Sidon speed thy course; 
There find a herd of heifers wand'ring o'er 
The neighb'ring hill, and drive 'em to the shore." 

Thus spoke the God, concealing his intent. 
The trusty Hermes, on his message went, 
And found the herd of heifers wand'ring o'er 
A neighb'ring hill, and drove 'em to the shore; 
Where the king's daughter, with a lovely train 
Of fellow-nymphs, was sporting on the plain. 

The dignity of empire laid aside, 
(For love but ill agrees with kingly pride) 
The ruler of the skies, the thund'ring God, 
Who shakes the world's foundations with a nod, 
Among a herd of lowing heifers ran, 
Frisk'd in a bull, and bellow'd o'er the plain. 
Large rowles of fat about his shoulders clung, 
And from his neck the double dewlap hung. 
His skin was whiter than the snow that lies 
Unsully'd by the breath of southern skies; 
Small shining horns on his curl'd forehead stand, 
As turn'd and polish'd by the work-man's hand; 
His eye-balls rowl'd, not formidably bright, 
But gaz'd and languish'd with a gentle light. 
His ev'ry look was peaceful, and exprest 
The softness of the lover in the beast. 

Agenor's royal daughter, as she plaid 
Among the fields, the milk-white bull survey'd, 
And view'd his spotless body with delight, 
And at a distance kept him in her sight. 
At length she pluck'd the rising flow'rs, and fed 
The gentle beast, and fondly stroak'd his head. 
He stood well-pleas'd to touch the charming fair, 
But hardly could confine his pleasure there. 
And now he wantons o'er the neighb'ring strand, 
Now rowls his body on the yellow sand; 
And, now perceiving all her fears decay'd, 
Comes tossing forward to the royal maid; 
Gives her his breast to stroke, and downward turns 
His grizly brow, and gently stoops his horns. 
In flow'ry wreaths the royal virgin drest 
His bending horns, and kindly clapt his breast. 
'Till now grown wanton and devoid of fear, 
Not knowing that she prest the Thunderer, 
She plac'd her self upon his back, and rode 
O'er fields and meadows, seated on the God. 

He gently march'd along, and by degrees 
Left the dry meadow, and approach'd the seas; 
Where now he dips his hoofs and wets his thighs, 
Now plunges in, and carries off the prize. 
The frighted nymph looks backward on the shoar, 
And hears the tumbling billows round her roar; 
But still she holds him fast: one hand is born 
Upon his back; the other grasps a horn: 
Her train of ruffling garments flies behind, 
Swells in the air, and hovers in the wind. 

Through storms and tempests he the virgin bore, 
And lands her safe on the Dictean shore; 
Where now, in his divinest form array'd, 
In his true shape he captivates the maid; 
Who gazes on him, and with wond'ring eyes 
Beholds the new majestick figure rise, 
His glowing features, and celestial light, 
And all the God discover'd to her sight. 

When now Agenor had his daughter lost, 
He sent his son to search on ev'ry coast; 
And sternly bid him to his arms restore 
The darling maid, or see his face no more, 
But live an exile in a foreign clime; 
Thus was the father pious to a crime. 
The restless youth search'd all the world around; 
But how can Jove in his amours be found? 
When, tir'd at length with unsuccessful toil, 
To shun his angry sire and native soil, 
He goes a suppliant to the Delphick dome; 
There asks the God what new appointed home 
Should end his wand'rings, and his toils relieve. 
The Delphick oracles this answer give. 

"Behold among the fields a lonely cow, 
Unworn with yokes, unbroken to the plow; 
Mark well the place where first she lays her down, 
There measure out thy walls, and build thy town, 
And from thy guide Boeotia call the land, 
In which the destin'd walls and town shall stand." 

No sooner had he left the dark abode, 
Big with the promise of the Delphick God, 
When in the fields the fatal cow he view'd, 
Nor gall'd with yokes, nor worn with servitude: 
Her gently at a distance he pursu'd; 
And as he walk'd aloof, in silence pray'd 
To the great Pow'r whose counsels he obey'd. 
Her way thro' flow'ry Panope she took, 
And now, Cephisus, cross'd thy silver brook; 
When to the Heav'ns her spacious front she rais'd, 
And bellow'd thrice, then backward turning gaz'd 
On those behind, 'till on the destin'd place 
She stoop'd, and couch'd amid the rising grass. 

Cadmus salutes the soil, and gladly hails 
The new-found mountains, and the nameless vales, 
And thanks the Gods, and turns about his eye 
To see his new dominions round him lye; 
Then sends his servants to a neighb'ring grove 
For living streams, a sacrifice to Jove. 
O'er the wide plain there rose a shady wood 
Of aged trees; in its dark bosom stood 
A bushy thicket, pathless and unworn, 
O'er-run with brambles, and perplex'd with thorn: 
Amidst the brake a hollow den was found, 
With rocks and shelving arches vaulted round. 

Deep in the dreary den, conceal'd from day, 
Sacred to Mars, a mighty dragon lay, 
Bloated with poison to a monstrous size; 
Fire broke in flashes when he glanc'd his eyes: 
His tow'ring crest was glorious to behold, 
His shoulders and his sides were scal'd with gold; 
Three tongues he brandish'd when he charg'd his foes; 
His teeth stood jaggy in three dreadful rowes. 
The Tyrians in the den for water sought, 
And with their urns explor'd the hollow vault: 
From side to side their empty urns rebound, 
And rowse the sleeping serpent with the sound. 
Strait he bestirs him, and is seen to rise; 
And now with dreadful hissings fills the skies, 
And darts his forky tongues, and rowles his glaring eyes.

The Tyrians drop their vessels in the fright, 
All pale and trembling at the hideous sight. 
Spire above spire uprear'd in air he stood, 
And gazing round him over-look'd the wood: 
Then floating on the ground in circles rowl'd; 
Then leap'd upon them in a mighty fold. 
Of such a bulk, and such a monstrous size 
The serpent in the polar circle lyes, 
That stretches over half the northern skies. 
In vain the Tyrians on their arms rely, 
In vain attempt to fight, in vain to fly: 
All their endeavours and their hopes are vain; 
Some die entangled in the winding train; 
Some are devour'd, or feel a loathsom death, 
Swoln up with blasts of pestilential breath. 

And now the scorching sun was mounted high, 
In all its lustre, to the noon-day sky; 
When, anxious for his friends, and fill'd with cares, 
To search the woods th' impatient chief prepares. 
A lion's hide around his loins he wore, 
The well poiz'd javelin to the field he bore, 
Inur'd to blood; the far-destroying dart; 
And, the best weapon, an undaunted heart. 

Soon as the youth approach'd the fatal place, 
He saw his servants breathless on the grass; 
The scaly foe amid their corps he view'd, 
Basking at ease, and feasting in their blood. 
"Such friends," he cries, "deserv'd a longer date; 
But Cadmus will revenge or share their fate." 
Then heav'd a stone, and rising to the throw, 
He sent it in a whirlwind at the foe: 
A tow'r, assaulted by so rude a stroke, 
With all its lofty battlements had shook; 
But nothing here th' unwieldy rock avails, 
Rebounding harmless from the plaited scales, 
That, firmly join'd, preserv'd him from a wound, 
With native armour crusted all around. 
With more success, the dart unerring flew, 
Which at his back the raging warriour threw; 
Amid the plaited scales it took its course, 
And in the spinal marrow spent its force. 
The monster hiss'd aloud, and rag'd in vain, 
And writh'd his body to and fro with pain; 
He bit the dart, and wrench'd the wood away; 
The point still buried in the marrow lay. 
And now his rage, increasing with his pain, 
Reddens his eyes, and beats in ev'ry vein; 
Churn'd in his teeth the foamy venom rose, 
Whilst from his mouth a blast of vapours flows, 
Such as th' infernal Stygian waters cast. 
The plants around him wither in the blast. 
Now in a maze of rings he lies enrowl'd, 
Now all unravel'd, and without a fold; 
Now, like a torrent, with a mighty force 
Bears down the forest in his boist'rous course. 
Cadmus gave back, and on the lion's spoil 
Sustain'd the shock, then forc'd him to recoil; 
The pointed jav'lin warded off his rage: 
Mad with his pains, and furious to engage, 
The serpent champs the steel, and bites the spear, 
'Till blood and venom all the point besmear. 
But still the hurt he yet receiv'd was slight; 
For, whilst the champion with redoubled might 
Strikes home the jav'lin, his retiring foe 
Shrinks from the wound, and disappoints the blow. 

The dauntless heroe still pursues his stroke, 
And presses forward, 'till a knotty oak 
Retards his foe, and stops him in the rear; 
Full in his throat he plung'd the fatal spear, 
That in th' extended neck a passage found, 
And pierc'd the solid timber through the wound. 
Fix'd to the reeling trunk, with many a stroke 
Of his huge tail he lash'd the sturdy oak; 
'Till spent with toil, and lab'ring hard for breath, 
He now lay twisting in the pangs of death. 

Cadmus beheld him wallow in a flood 
Of swimming poison, intermix'd with blood; 
When suddenly a speech was heard from high 
(The speech was heard, nor was the speaker nigh), 
"Why dost thou thus with secret pleasure see, 
Insulting man! what thou thy self shalt be?" 
Astonish'd at the voice, he stood amaz'd, 
And all around with inward horror gaz'd: 
When Pallas swift descending from the skies, 
Pallas, the guardian of the bold and wise, 
Bids him plow up the field, and scatter round 
The dragon's teeth o'er all the furrow'd ground; 
Then tells the youth how to his wond'ring eyes 
Embattled armies from the field should rise. 

He sows the teeth at Pallas's command, 
And flings the future people from his hand. 
The clods grow warm, and crumble where he sows; 
And now the pointed spears advance in rows; 
Now nodding plumes appear, and shining crests, 
Now the broad shoulders and the rising breasts; 
O'er all the field the breathing harvest swarms, 
A growing host, a crop of men and arms. 

So through the parting stage a figure rears 
Its body up, and limb by limb appears 
By just degrees; 'till all the man arise, 
And in his full proportion strikes the eyes. 

Cadmus surpriz'd, and startled at the sight 
Of his new foes, prepar'd himself for fight: 
When one cry'd out, "Forbear, fond man, forbear 
To mingle in a blind promiscuous war." 
This said, he struck his brother to the ground, 
Himself expiring by another's wound; 
Nor did the third his conquest long survive, 
Dying ere scarce he had begun to live. 

The dire example ran through all the field, 
'Till heaps of brothers were by brothers kill'd; 
The furrows swam in blood: and only five 
Of all the vast increase were left alive. 
Echion one, at Pallas's command, 
Let fall the guiltless weapon from his hand, 
And with the rest a peaceful treaty makes, 
Whom Cadmus as his friends and partners takes; 
So founds a city on the promis'd earth, 
And gives his new Boeotian empire birth. 

Here Cadmus reign'd; and now one would have guess'd 
The royal founder in his exile blest: 
Long did he live within his new abodes, 
Ally'd by marriage to the deathless Gods; 
And, in a fruitful wife's embraces old, 
A long increase of children's children told: 
But no frail man, however great or high, 
Can be concluded blest before he die. 

Actaeon was the first of all his race, 
Who griev'd his grandsire in his borrow'd face; 
Condemn'd by stern Diana to bemoan 
The branching horns, and visage not his own; 
To shun his once lov'd dogs, to bound away, 
And from their huntsman to become their prey, 
And yet consider why the change was wrought, 
You'll find it his misfortune, not his fault; 
Or, if a fault, it was the fault of chance: 
For how can guilt proceed from ignorance? 

In a fair chace a shady mountain stood, 
Well stor'd with game, and mark'd with trails of blood; 
Here did the huntsmen, 'till the heat of day, 
Pursue the stag, and load themselves with rey: 
When thus Actaeon calling to the rest: 
"My friends," said he, "our sport is at the best, 
The sun is high advanc'd, and downward sheds 
His burning beams directly on our heads; 
Then by consent abstain from further spoils, 
Call off the dogs, and gather up the toils, 
And ere to-morrow's sun begins his race, 
Take the cool morning to renew the chace." 
They all consent, and in a chearful train 
The jolly huntsmen, loaden with the slain, 
Return in triumph from the sultry plain. 

Down in a vale with pine and cypress clad, 
Refresh'd with gentle winds, and brown with shade, 
The chaste Diana's private haunt, there stood 
Full in the centre of the darksome wood 
A spacious grotto, all around o'er-grown 
With hoary moss, and arch'd with pumice-stone. 
From out its rocky clefts the waters flow, 
And trickling swell into a lake below. 
Nature had ev'ry where so plaid her part, 
That ev'ry where she seem'd to vie with art. 
Here the bright Goddess, toil'd and chaf'd with heat, 
Was wont to bathe her in the cool retreat. 

Here did she now with all her train resort, 
Panting with heat, and breathless from the sport; 
Her armour-bearer laid her bow aside, 
Some loos'd her sandals, some her veil unty'd; 
Each busy nymph her proper part undrest; 
While Crocale, more handy than the rest, 
Gather'd her flowing hair, and in a noose 
Bound it together, whilst her own hung loose. 
Five of the more ignoble sort by turns 
Fetch up the water, and unlade the urns. 

Now all undrest the shining Goddess stood, 
When young Actaeon, wilder'd in the wood, 
To the cool grott by his hard fate betray'd, 
The fountains fill'd with naked nymphs survey'd. 
The frighted virgins shriek'd at the surprize 
(The forest echo'd with their piercing cries). 
Then in a huddle round their Goddess prest: 
She, proudly eminent above the rest, 
With blushes glow'd; such blushes as adorn 
The ruddy welkin, or the purple morn; 
And tho' the crowding nymphs her body hide, 
Half backward shrunk, and view'd him from a side. 
Surpriz'd, at first she would have snatch'd her bow, 
But sees the circling waters round her flow; 
These in the hollow of her hand she took, 
And dash'd 'em in his face, while thus she spoke: 
"Tell, if thou can'st, the wond'rous sight disclos'd, 
A Goddess naked to thy view expos'd." 

This said, the man begun to disappear 
By slow degrees, and ended in a deer. 
A rising horn on either brow he wears, 
And stretches out his neck, and pricks his ears; 
Rough is his skin, with sudden hairs o'er-grown, 
His bosom pants with fears before unknown: 
Transform'd at length, he flies away in haste, 
And wonders why he flies away so fast. 
But as by chance, within a neighb'ring brook, 
He saw his branching horns and alter'd look. 
Wretched Actaeon! in a doleful tone 
He try'd to speak, but only gave a groan; 
And as he wept, within the watry glass 
He saw the big round drops, with silent pace, 
Run trickling down a savage hairy face. 
What should he do? Or seek his old abodes, 
Or herd among the deer, and sculk in woods! 
Here shame dissuades him, there his fear prevails, 
And each by turns his aking heart assails. 

As he thus ponders, he behind him spies 
His op'ning hounds, and now he hears their cries: 
A gen'rous pack, or to maintain the chace, 
Or snuff the vapour from the scented grass. 

He bounded off with fear, and swiftly ran 
O'er craggy mountains, and the flow'ry plain; 
Through brakes and thickets forc'd his way, and flew 
Through many a ring, where once he did pursue. 
In vain he oft endeavour'd to proclaim 
His new misfortune, and to tell his name; 
Nor voice nor words the brutal tongue supplies; 
From shouting men, and horns, and dogs he flies, 
Deafen'd and stunn'd with their promiscuous cries. 
When now the fleetest of the pack, that prest 
Close at his heels, and sprung before the rest, 
Had fasten'd on him, straight another pair, 
Hung on his wounded haunch, and held him there, 
'Till all the pack came up, and ev'ry hound 
Tore the sad huntsman grov'ling on the ground, 
Who now appear'd but one continu'd wound. 
With dropping tears his bitter fate he moans, 
And fills the mountain with his dying groans. 
His servants with a piteous look he spies, 
And turns about his supplicating eyes. 
His servants, ignorant of what had chanc'd, 
With eager haste and joyful shouts advanc'd, 
And call'd their lord Actaeon to the game. 
He shook his head in answer to the name; 
He heard, but wish'd he had indeed been gone, 
Or only to have stood a looker-on. 
But to his grief he finds himself too near, 
And feels his rav'nous dogs with fury tear 
Their wretched master panting in a deer. 

Actaeon's suff'rings, and Diana's rage, 
Did all the thoughts of men and Gods engage; 
Some call'd the evils which Diana wrought, 
Too great, and disproportion'd to the fault: 
Others again, esteem'd Actaeon's woes 
Fit for a virgin Goddess to impose. 
The hearers into diff'rent parts divide, 
And reasons are produc'd on either side. 

Juno alone, of all that heard the news, 
Nor would condemn the Goddess, nor excuse: 
She heeded not the justice of the deed, 
But joy'd to see the race of Cadmus bleed; 
For still she kept Europa in her mind, 
And, for her sake, detested all her kind. 
Besides, to aggravate her hate, she heard 
How Semele, to Jove's embrace preferr'd, 
Was now grown big with an immortal load, 
And carry'd in her womb a future God. 
Thus terribly incens'd, the Goddess broke 
To sudden fury, and abruptly spoke. 

"Are my reproaches of so small a force? 
'Tis time I then pursue another course: 
It is decreed the guilty wretch shall die, 
If I'm indeed the mistress of the sky, 
If rightly styl'd among the Pow'rs above 
The wife and sister of the thund'ring Jove 
(And none can sure a sister's right deny); 
It is decreed the guilty wretch shall die. 
She boasts an honour I can hardly claim, 
Pregnant she rises to a mother's name; 
While proud and vain she triumphs in her Jove, 
And shows the glorious tokens of his love: 
But if I'm still the mistress of the skies, 
By her own lover the fond beauty dies." 
This said, descending in a yellow cloud, 
Before the gates of Semele she stood. 

Old Beroe's decrepit shape she wears, 
Her wrinkled visage, and her hoary hairs; 
Whilst in her trembling gait she totters on, 
And learns to tattle in the nurse's tone. 
The Goddess, thus disguis'd in age, beguil'd 
With pleasing stories her false foster-child. 
Much did she talk of love, and when she came 
To mention to the nymph her lover's name, 
Fetching a sigh, and holding down her head, 
"'Tis well," says she, "if all be true that's said. 
But trust me, child, I'm much inclin'd to fear 
Some counterfeit in this your Jupiter: 
Many an honest well-designing maid 
Has been by these pretended Gods betray'd, 
But if he be indeed the thund'ring Jove, 
Bid him, when next he courts the rites of love, 
Descend triumphant from th' etherial sky, 
In all the pomp of his divinity, 
Encompass'd round by those celestial charms, 
With which he fills th' immortal Juno's arms." 

Th' unwary nymph, ensnar'd with what she said, 
Desir'd of Jove, when next he sought her bed, 
To grant a certain gift which she would chuse; 
"Fear not," reply'd the God, "that I'll refuse 
Whate'er you ask: may Styx confirm my voice, 
Chuse what you will, and you shall have your choice." 
"Then," says the nymph, "when next you seek my arms, 
May you descend in those celestial charms, 
With which your Juno's bosom you enflame, 
And fill with transport Heav'n's immortal dame." 
The God surpriz'd would fain have stopp'd her voice, 
But he had sworn, and she had made her choice. 

To keep his promise he ascends, and shrowds 
His awful brow in whirl-winds and in clouds; 
Whilst all around, in terrible array, 
His thunders rattle, and his light'nings play. 
And yet, the dazling lustre to abate, 
He set not out in all his pomp and state, 
Clad in the mildest light'ning of the skies, 
And arm'd with thunder of the smallest size: 
Not those huge bolts, by which the giants slain 
Lay overthrown on the Phlegrean plain. 
'Twas of a lesser mould, and lighter weight; 
They call it thunder of a second-rate, 
For the rough Cyclops, who by Jove's command 
Temper'd the bolt, and turn'd it to his hand, 
Work'd up less flame and fury in its make, 
And quench'd it sooner in the standing lake. 
Thus dreadfully adorn'd, with horror bright, 
Th' illustrious God, descending from his height, 
Came rushing on her in a storm of light. 

The mortal dame, too feeble to engage 
The lightning's flashes, and the thunder's rage, 
Consum'd amidst the glories she desir'd, 
And in the terrible embrace expir'd. 

But, to preserve his offspring from the tomb, 
Jove took him smoaking from the blasted womb: 
And, if on ancient tales we may rely, 
Inclos'd th' abortive infant in his thigh. 
Here when the babe had all his time fulfill'd, 
Ino first took him for her foster-child; 
Then the Niseans, in their dark abode, 
Nurs'd secretly with milk the thriving God. 

'Twas now, while these transactions past on Earth, 
And Bacchus thus procur'd a second birth, 
When Jove, dispos'd to lay aside the weight 
Of publick empire and the cares of state, 
As to his queen in nectar bowls he quaff'd, 
"In troth," says he, and as he spoke he laugh'd, 
"The sense of pleasure in the male is far 
More dull and dead, than what you females share." 
Juno the truth of what was said deny'd; 
Tiresias therefore must the cause decide, 
For he the pleasure of each sex had try'd. 

It happen'd once, within a shady wood, 
Two twisted snakes he in conjunction view'd, 
When with his staff their slimy folds he broke, 
And lost his manhood at the fatal stroke. 
But, after seven revolving years, he view'd 
The self-same serpents in the self-same wood: 
"And if," says he, "such virtue in you lye, 
That he who dares your slimy folds untie 
Must change his kind, a second stroke I'll try." 
Again he struck the snakes, and stood again 
New-sex'd, and strait recover'd into man. 
Him therefore both the deities create 
The sov'raign umpire, in their grand debate; 
And he declar'd for Jove: when Juno fir'd, 
More than so trivial an affair requir'd, 
Depriv'd him, in her fury, of his sight, 
And left him groping round in sudden night. 
But Jove (for so it is in Heav'n decreed, 
That no one God repeal another's deed) 
Irradiates all his soul with inward light, 
And with the prophet's art relieves the want of sight. 

Fam'd far and near for knowing things to come, 
From him th' enquiring nations sought their doom; 
The fair Liriope his answers try'd, 
And first th' unerring prophet justify'd. 
This nymph the God Cephisus had abus'd, 
With all his winding waters circumfus'd, 
And on the Nereid got a lovely boy, 
Whom the soft maids ev'n then beheld with joy. 

The tender dame, sollicitous to know 
Whether her child should reach old age or no, 
Consults the sage Tiresias, who replies, 
"If e'er he knows himself he surely dies." 
Long liv'd the dubious mother in suspence, 
'Till time unriddled all the prophet's sense. 

Narcissus now his sixteenth year began, 
Just turn'd of boy, and on the verge of man; 
Many a friend the blooming youth caress'd, 
Many a love-sick maid her flame confess'd: 
Such was his pride, in vain the friend caress'd, 
The love-sick maid in vain her flame confess'd. 

Once, in the woods, as he pursu'd the chace, 
The babbling Echo had descry'd his face; 
She, who in others' words her silence breaks, 
Nor speaks her self but when another speaks. 
Echo was then a maid, of speech bereft, 
Of wonted speech; for tho' her voice was left, 
Juno a curse did on her tongue impose, 
To sport with ev'ry sentence in the close. 
Full often when the Goddess might have caught 
Jove and her rivals in the very fault, 
This nymph with subtle stories would delay 
Her coming, 'till the lovers slip'd away. 
The Goddess found out the deceit in time, 
And then she cry'd, "That tongue, for this thy crime, 
Which could so many subtle tales produce, 
Shall be hereafter but of little use." 
Hence 'tis she prattles in a fainter tone, 
With mimick sounds, and accents not her own. 

This love-sick virgin, over-joy'd to find 
The boy alone, still follow'd him behind: 
When glowing warmly at her near approach, 
As sulphur blazes at the taper's touch, 
She long'd her hidden passion to reveal, 
And tell her pains, but had not words to tell: 
She can't begin, but waits for the rebound, 
To catch his voice, and to return the sound. 

The nymph, when nothing could Narcissus move, 
Still dash'd with blushes for her slighted love, 
Liv'd in the shady covert of the woods, 
In solitary caves and dark abodes; 
Where pining wander'd the rejected fair, 
'Till harrass'd out, and worn away with care, 
The sounding skeleton, of blood bereft, 
Besides her bones and voice had nothing left. 
Her bones are petrify'd, her voice is found 
In vaults, where still it doubles ev'ry sound. 

Thus did the nymphs in vain caress the boy, 
He still was lovely, but he still was coy; 
When one fair virgin of the slighted train 
Thus pray'd the Gods, provok'd by his disdain, 
"Oh may he love like me, and love like me in vain!" 
Rhamnusia pity'd the neglected fair, 
And with just vengeance answer'd to her pray'r. 

There stands a fountain in a darksom wood, 
Nor stain'd with falling leaves nor rising mud; 
Untroubled by the breath of winds it rests, 
Unsully'd by the touch of men or beasts; 
High bow'rs of shady trees above it grow, 
And rising grass and chearful greens below. 
Pleas'd with the form and coolness of the place, 
And over-heated by the morning chace, 
Narcissus on the grassie verdure lyes: 
But whilst within the chrystal fount he tries 
To quench his heat, he feels new heats arise. 
For as his own bright image he survey'd, 
He fell in love with the fantastick shade; 
And o'er the fair resemblance hung unmov'd, 
Nor knew, fond youth! it was himself he lov'd. 
The well-turn'd neck and shoulders he descries, 
The spacious forehead, and the sparkling eyes; 
The hands that Bacchus might not scorn to show, 
And hair that round Apollo's head might flow; 
With all the purple youthfulness of face, 
That gently blushes in the wat'ry glass. 
By his own flames consum'd the lover lyes, 
And gives himself the wound by which he dies. 
To the cold water oft he joins his lips, 
Oft catching at the beauteous shade he dips 
His arms, as often from himself he slips. 
Nor knows he who it is his arms pursue 
With eager clasps, but loves he knows not who. 

What could, fond youth, this helpless passion move? 
What kindled in thee this unpity'd love? 
Thy own warm blush within the water glows, 
With thee the colour'd shadow comes and goes, 
Its empty being on thy self relies; 
Step thou aside, and the frail charmer dies. 

Still o'er the fountain's wat'ry gleam he stood, 
Mindless of sleep, and negligent of food; 
Still view'd his face, and languish'd as he view'd. 
At length he rais'd his head, and thus began 
To vent his griefs, and tell the woods his pain. 
"You trees," says he, "and thou surrounding grove, 
Who oft have been the kindly scenes of love, 
Tell me, if e'er within your shades did lye 
A youth so tortur'd, so perplex'd as I? 
I, who before me see the charming fair, 
Whilst there he stands, and yet he stands not there: 
In such a maze of love my thoughts are lost: 
And yet no bulwark'd town, nor distant coast, 
Preserves the beauteous youth from being seen, 
No mountains rise, nor oceans flow between. 
A shallow water hinders my embrace; 
And yet the lovely mimick wears a face 
That kindly smiles, and when I bend to join 
My lips to his, he fondly bends to mine. 
Hear, gentle youth, and pity my complaint, 
Come from thy well, thou fair inhabitant. 
My charms an easy conquest have obtain'd 
O'er other hearts, by thee alone disdain'd. 
But why should I despair? I'm sure he burns 
With equal flames, and languishes by turns. 
When-e'er I stoop, he offers at a kiss, 
And when my arms I stretch, he stretches his. 
His eye with pleasure on my face he keeps, 
He smiles my smiles, and when I weep he weeps. 
When e'er I speak, his moving lips appear 
To utter something, which I cannot hear. 

"Ah wretched me! I now begin too late 
To find out all the long-perplex'd deceit; 
It is my self I love, my self I see; 
The gay delusion is a part of me. 
I kindle up the fires by which I burn, 
And my own beauties from the well return. 
Whom should I court? how utter my complaint? 
Enjoyment but produces my restraint, 
And too much plenty makes me die for want. 
How gladly would I from my self remove! 
And at a distance set the thing I love. 
My breast is warm'd with such unusual fire, 
I wish him absent whom I most desire. 
And now I faint with grief; my fate draws nigh; 
In all the pride of blooming youth I die. 
Death will the sorrows of my heart relieve. 
Oh might the visionary youth survive, 
I should with joy my latest breath resign! 
But oh! I see his fate involv'd in mine." 

This said, the weeping youth again return'd 
To the clear fountain, where again he burn'd; 
His tears defac'd the surface of the well, 
With circle after circle, as they fell: 
And now the lovely face but half appears, 
O'er-run with wrinkles, and deform'd with tears. 
"Ah whither," cries Narcissus, "dost thou fly? 
Let me still feed the flame by which I die; 
Let me still see, tho' I'm no further blest." 
Then rends his garment off, and beats his breast: 
His naked bosom redden'd with the blow, 
In such a blush as purple clusters show, 
Ere yet the sun's autumnal heats refine 
Their sprightly juice, and mellow it to wine. 
The glowing beauties of his breast he spies, 
And with a new redoubled passion dies. 
As wax dissolves, as ice begins to run, 
And trickle into drops before the sun; 
So melts the youth, and languishes away, 
His beauty withers, and his limbs decay; 
And none of those attractive charms remain, 
To which the slighted Echo su'd in vain. 

She saw him in his present misery, 
Whom, spight of all her wrongs, she griev'd to see. 
She answer'd sadly to the lover's moan, 
Sigh'd back his sighs, and groan'd to ev'ry groan: 
"Ah youth! belov'd in vain," Narcissus cries; 
"Ah youth! belov'd in vain," the nymph replies. 
"Farewel," says he; the parting sound scarce fell 
From his faint lips, but she reply'd, "farewel." 
Then on th' wholsome earth he gasping lyes, 
'Till death shuts up those self-admiring eyes. 
To the cold shades his flitting ghost retires, 
And in the Stygian waves it self admires. 

For him the Naiads and the Dryads mourn, 
Whom the sad Echo answers in her turn; 
And now the sister-nymphs prepare his urn: 
When, looking for his corps, they only found 
A rising stalk, with yellow blossoms crown'd. 

This sad event gave blind Tiresias fame, 
Through Greece establish'd in a prophet's name. 

Th' unhallow'd Pentheus only durst deride 
The cheated people, and their eyeless guide. 
To whom the prophet in his fury said, 
Shaking the hoary honours of his head: 
"'Twere well, presumptuous man, 'twere well for thee 
If thou wert eyeless too, and blind, like me: 
For the time comes, nay, 'tis already here, 
When the young God's solemnities appear: 
Which, if thou dost not with just rites adorn, 
Thy impious carcass, into pieces torn, 
Shall strew the woods, and hang on ev'ry thorn. 
Then, then, remember what I now foretel, 
And own the blind Tiresias saw too well." 

Still Pentheus scorns him, and derides his skill; 
But time did all the prophet's threats fulfil. 
For now through prostrate Greece young Bacchus rode, 
Whilst howling matrons celebrate the God: 
All ranks and sexes to his Orgies ran, 
To mingle in the pomps, and fill the train. 
When Pentheus thus his wicked rage express'd: 
"What madness, Thebans, has your souls possess'd? 
Can hollow timbrels, can a drunken shout, 
And the lewd clamours of a beastly rout, 
Thus quell your courage; can the weak alarm 
Of women's yells those stubborn souls disarm, 
Whom nor the sword nor trumpet e'er could fright, 
Nor the loud din and horror of a fight? 
And you, our sires, who left your old abodes, 
And fix'd in foreign earth your country Gods; 
Will you without a stroak your city yield, 
And poorly quit an undisputed field? 
But you, whose youth and vigour should inspire 
Heroick warmth, and kindle martial fire, 
Whom burnish'd arms and crested helmets grace, 
Not flow'ry garlands and a painted face; 
Remember him to whom you stand ally'd: 
The serpent for his well of waters dy'd. 
He fought the strong; do you his courage show, 
And gain a conquest o'er a feeble foe. 
If Thebes must fall, oh might the fates afford 
A nobler doom from famine, fire, or sword. 
Then might the Thebans perish with renown: 
But now a beardless victor sacks the town; 
Whom nor the prancing steed, nor pond'rous shield, 
Nor the hack'd helmet, nor the dusty field, 
But the soft joys of luxury and ease, 
The purple vests, and flow'ry garlands please. 
Stand then aside, I'll make the counterfeit 
Renounce his god-head, and confess the cheat. 
Acrisius from the Grecian walls repell'd 
This boasted pow'r; why then should Pentheus yield? 
Go quickly drag th' impostor boy to me; 
I'll try the force of his divinity." 
Thus did th' audacious wretch those rites profane; 
His friends dissuade th' audacious wretch in vain: 
In vain his grandsire urg'd him to give o'er 
His impious threats; the wretch but raves the more. 

So have I seen a river gently glide, 
In a smooth course, and inoffensive tide; 
But if with dams its current we restrain, 
It bears down all, and foams along the plain. 

But now his servants came besmear'd with blood, 
Sent by their haughty prince to seize the God; 
The God they found not in the frantick throng, 
But dragg'd a zealous votary along. 

Him Pentheus view'd with fury in his look, 
And scarce with-held his hands, whilst thus he spoke: 
"Vile slave! whom speedy vengeance shall pursue, 
And terrify thy base seditious crew: 
Thy country and thy parentage reveal, 
And, why thou joinest in these mad Orgies, tell." 

The captive views him with undaunted eyes, 
And, arm'd with inward innocence, replies, 

"From high Meonia's rocky shores I came, 
Of poor descent, Acoetes is my name: 
My sire was meanly born; no oxen plow'd 
His fruitful fields, nor in his pastures low'd. 
His whole estate within the waters lay; 
With lines and hooks he caught the finny prey, 
His art was all his livelyhood; which he 
Thus with his dying lips bequeath'd to me: 
In streams, my boy, and rivers take thy chance; 
There swims, said he, thy whole inheritance. 
Long did I live on this poor legacy; 
'Till tir'd with rocks, and my old native sky, 
To arts of navigation I inclin'd; 
Observ'd the turns and changes of the wind, 
Learn'd the fit havens, and began to note 
The stormy Hyades, the rainy Goat, 
The bright Taygete, and the shining Bears, 
With all the sailor's catalogue of stars. 

"Once, as by chance for Delos I design'd, 
My vessel, driv'n by a strong gust of wind, 
Moor'd in a Chian Creek; a-shore I went, 
And all the following night in Chios spent. 
When morning rose, I sent my mates to bring 
Supplies of water from a neighb'ring spring, 
Whilst I the motion of the winds explor'd; 
Then summon'd in my crew, and went aboard. 
Opheltes heard my summons, and with joy 
Brought to the shore a soft and lovely boy, 
With more than female sweetness in his look, 
Whom straggling in the neighb'ring fields he took. 
With fumes of wine the little captive glows, 
And nods with sleep, and staggers as he goes. 

"I view'd him nicely, and began to trace 
Each heav'nly feature, each immortal grace, 
And saw divinity in all his face, 
I know not who, said I, this God should be; 
But that he is a God I plainly see: 
And thou, who-e'er thou art, excuse the force 
These men have us'd; and oh befriend our course! 
Pray not for us, the nimble Dictys cry'd, 
Dictys, that could the main-top mast bestride, 
And down the ropes with active vigour slide. 
To the same purpose old Epopeus spoke, 
Who over-look'd the oars, and tim'd the stroke; 
The same the pilot, and the same the rest; 
Such impious avarice their souls possest. 
Nay, Heav'n forbid that I should bear away 
Within my vessel so divine a prey, 
Said I; and stood to hinder their intent: 
When Lycabas, a wretch for murder sent 
From Tuscany, to suffer banishment, 
With his clench'd fist had struck me over-board, 
Had not my hands in falling grasp'd a cord. 

"His base confederates the fact approve; 
When Bacchus (for 'twas he) begun to move, 
Wak'd by the noise and clamours which they rais'd; 
And shook his drowsie limbs, and round him gaz'd: 
What means this noise? he cries; am I betray'd? 
Ah, whither, whither must I be convey'd? 
Fear not, said Proreus, child, but tell us where 
You wish to land, and trust our friendly care. 
To Naxos then direct your course, said he; 
Naxos a hospitable port shall be 
To each of you, a joyful home to me. 
By ev'ry God, that rules the sea or sky, 
The perjur'd villains promise to comply, 
And bid me hasten to unmoor the ship. 
With eager joy I launch into the deep; 
And, heedless of the fraud, for Naxos stand. 
They whisper oft, and beckon with the hand, 
And give me signs, all anxious for their prey, 
To tack about, and steer another way. 
Then let some other to my post succeed, 
Said I, I'm guiltless of so foul a deed. 
What, says Ethalion, must the ship's whole crew 
Follow your humour, and depend on you? 
And strait himself he seated at the prore, 
And tack'd about, and sought another shore. 

"The beauteous youth now found himself betray'd, 
And from the deck the rising waves survey'd, 
And seem'd to weep, and as he wept he said: 
And do you thus my easy faith beguile? 
Thus do you bear me to my native isle? 
Will such a multitude of men employ 
Their strength against a weak defenceless boy? 

"In vain did I the God-like youth deplore, 
The more I begg'd, they thwarted me the more. 
And now by all the Gods in Heav'n that hear 
This solemn oath, by Bacchus' self, I swear, 
The mighty miracle that did ensue, 
Although it seems beyond belief, is true. 
The vessel, fix'd and rooted in the flood, 
Unmov'd by all the beating billows stood. 
In vain the mariners would plow the main 
With sails unfurl'd, and strike their oars in vain; 
Around their oars a twining ivy cleaves, 
And climbs the mast, and hides the cords in leaves: 
The sails are cover'd with a chearful green, 
And berries in the fruitful canvass seen. 
Amidst the waves a sudden forest rears 
Its verdant head, and a new Spring appears. 

"The God we now behold with open'd eyes; 
A herd of spotted panthers round him lyes 
In glaring forms; the grapy clusters spread 
On his fair brows, and dangle on his head. 
And whilst he frowns, and brandishes his spear, 
My mates surpriz'd with madness or with fear, 
Leap'd over board; first perjur'd Madon found 
Rough scales and fins his stiff'ning sides surround; 
Ah what, cries one, has thus transform'd thy look? 
Strait his own mouth grew wider as he spoke; 
And now himself he views with like surprize. 
Still at his oar th' industrious Libys plies; 
But, as he plies, each busy arm shrinks in, 
And by degrees is fashion'd to a fin. 
Another, as he catches at a cord, 
Misses his arms, and, tumbling over-board, 
With his broad fins and forky tail he laves 
The rising surge, and flounces in the waves. 
Thus all my crew transform'd around the ship, 
Or dive below, or on the surface leap, 
And spout the waves, and wanton in the deep. 
Full nineteen sailors did the ship convey, 
A shole of nineteen dolphins round her play. 
I only in my proper shape appear, 
Speechless with wonder, and half dead with fear, 
'Till Bacchus kindly bid me fear no more. 
With him I landed on the Chian shore, 
And him shall ever gratefully adore." 

"This forging slave," says Pentheus, "would prevail 
O'er our just fury by a far-fetch'd tale: 
Go, let him feel the whips, the swords, the fire, 
And in the tortures of the rack expire." 
Th' officious servants hurry him away, 
And the poor captive in a dungeon lay. 
But, whilst the whips and tortures are prepar'd, 
The gates fly open, of themselves unbarr'd; 
At liberty th' unfetter'd captive stands, 
And flings the loosen'd shackles from his hands. 

But Pentheus, grown more furious than before, 
Resolv'd to send his messengers no more, 
But went himself to the distracted throng, 
Where high Cithaeron echo'd with their song. 
And as the fiery war-horse paws the ground, 
And snorts and trembles at the trumpet's sound; 
Transported thus he heard the frantick rout, 
And rav'd and madden'd at the distant shout. 

A spacious circuit on the hill there stood. 
Level and wide, and skirted round with wood; 
Here the rash Pentheus, with unhallow'd eyes, 
The howling dames and mystick Orgies spies. 
His mother sternly view'd him where he stood, 
And kindled into madness as she view'd: 
Her leafy jav'lin at her son she cast, 
And cries, "The boar that lays our country waste! 
The boar, my sisters! Aim the fatal dart, 
And strike the brindled monster to the heart." 

Pentheus astonish'd heard the dismal sound, 
And sees the yelling matrons gath'ring round; 
He sees, and weeps at his approaching fate, 
And begs for mercy, and repents too late. 
"Help, help! my aunt Autonoe," he cry'd; 
"Remember, how your own Actaeon dy'd." 
Deaf to his cries, the frantick matron crops 
One stretch'd-out arm, the other Ino lops. 
In vain does Pentheus to his mother sue, 
And the raw bleeding stumps presents to view: 
His mother howl'd; and, heedless of his pray'r, 
Her trembling hand she twisted in his hair, 
"And this," she cry'd, "shall be Agave's share," 
When from the neck his struggling head she tore, 
And in her hands the ghastly visage bore. 
With pleasure all the hideous trunk survey; 
Then pull'd and tore the mangled limbs away, 
As starting in the pangs of death it lay, 
Soon as the wood its leafy honours casts, 
Blown off and scatter'd by autumnal blasts, 
With such a sudden death lay Pentheus slain, 
And in a thousand pieces strow'd the plain. 

By so distinguishing a judgment aw'd, 
The Thebans tremble, and confess the God. 

Yet still Alcithoe perverse remains, 
And Bacchus still, and all his rites, disdains. 
Too rash, and madly bold, she bids him prove 
Himself a God, nor owns the son of Jove. 
Her sisters too unanimous agree, 
Faithful associates in impiety. 
Be this a solemn feast, the priest had said; 
Be, with each mistress, unemploy'd each maid. 
With skins of beasts your tender limbs enclose, 
And with an ivy-crown adorn your brows, 
The leafy Thyrsus high in triumph bear, 
And give your locks to wanton in the air. 

These rites profan'd, the holy seer foreshow'd 
A mourning people, and a vengeful God. 

Matrons and pious wives obedience show, 
Distaffs, and wooll, half spun, away they throw: 
Then incense burn, and, Bacchus, thee adore, 
Or lov'st thou Nyseus, or Lyaeus more? 
O! doubly got, O! doubly born, they sung, 
Thou mighty Bromius, hail, from light'ning sprung! 
Hail, Thyon, Eleleus! each name is thine: 
Or, listen parent of the genial vine! 
Iachus! Evan! loudly they repeat, 
And not one Grecian attribute forget, 
Which to thy praise, great Deity, belong, 
Stil'd justly Liber in the Roman song. 
Eternity of youth is thine! enjoy 
Years roul'd on years, yet still a blooming boy. 
In Heav'n thou shin'st with a superior grace; 
Conceal thy horns, and 'tis a virgin's face. 
Thou taught'st the tawny Indian to obey, 
And Ganges, smoothly flowing, own'd thy sway. 
Lycurgus, Pentheus, equally profane, 
By thy just vengeance equally were slain. 
By thee the Tuscans, who conspir'd to keep 
Thee captive, plung'd, and cut with finns the deep. 
With painted reins, all-glitt'ring from afar, 
The spotted lynxes proudly draw thy car. 
Around, the Bacchae, and the satyrs throng; 
Behind, Silenus, drunk, lags slow along: 
On his dull ass he nods from side to side, 
Forbears to fall, yet half forgets to ride. 
Still at thy near approach, applauses loud 
Are heard, with yellings of the female crowd. 
Timbrels, and boxen pipes, with mingled cries, 
Swell up in sounds confus'd, and rend the skies. 
Come, Bacchus, come propitious, all implore, 
And act thy sacred orgies o'er and o'er. 

But Mineus' daughters, while these rites were pay'd, 
At home, impertinently busie, stay'd. 
Their wicked tasks they ply with various art, 
And thro' the loom the sliding shuttle dart; 
Or at the fire to comb the wooll they stand, 
Or twirl the spindle with a dext'rous hand. 
Guilty themselves, they force the guiltless in; 
Their maids, who share the labour, share the sin. 
At last one sister cries, who nimbly knew 
To draw nice threads, and winde the finest clue, 
While others idly rove, and Gods revere, 
Their fancy'd Gods! they know not who, or where; 
Let us, whom Pallas taught her better arts, 
Still working, cheer with mirthful chat our hearts, 
And to deceive the time, let me prevail 
With each by turns to tell some antique tale. 
She said: her sisters lik'd the humour well, 
And smiling, bad her the first story tell. 
But she a-while profoundly seem'd to muse, 
Perplex'd amid variety to chuse: 
And knew not, whether she should first relate 
The poor Dircetis, and her wond'rous fate. 
The Palestines believe it to a man, 
And show the lake, in which her scales began. 
Or if she rather should the daughter sing, 
Who in the hoary verge of life took wing; 
Who soar'd from Earth, and dwelt in tow'rs on high, 
And now a dove she flits along the sky. 
Or how lewd Nais, when her lust was cloy'd, 
To fishes turn'd the youths, she had enjoy'd, 
By pow'rful verse, and herbs; effect most strange! 
At last the changer shar'd herself the change. 
Or how the tree, which once white berries bore, 
Still crimson bears, since stain'd with crimson gore. 
The tree was new; she likes it, and begins 
To tell the tale, and as she tells, she spins. 

In Babylon, where first her queen, for state 
Rais'd walls of brick magnificently great, 
Liv'd Pyramus, and Thisbe, lovely pair! 
He found no eastern youth his equal there, 
And she beyond the fairest nymph was fair. 
A closer neighbourhood was never known, 
Tho' two the houses, yet the roof was one. 
Acquaintance grew, th' acquaintance they improve 
To friendship, friendship ripen'd into love: 
Love had been crown'd, but impotently mad, 
What parents could not hinder, they forbad. 
For with fierce flames young Pyramus still burn'd, 
And grateful Thisbe flames as fierce return'd. 
Aloud in words their thoughts they dare not break, 
But silent stand; and silent looks can speak. 
The fire of love the more it is supprest, 
The more it glows, and rages in the breast. 

When the division-wall was built, a chink 
Was left, the cement unobserv'd to shrink. 
So slight the cranny, that it still had been 
For centuries unclos'd, because unseen. 
But oh! what thing so small, so secret lies, 
Which scapes, if form'd for love, a lover's eyes? 
Ev'n in this narrow chink they quickly found 
A friendly passage for a trackless sound. 
Safely they told their sorrows, and their joys, 
In whisper'd murmurs, and a dying noise, 
By turns to catch each other's breath they strove, 
And suck'd in all the balmy breeze of love. 
Oft as on diff'rent sides they stood, they cry'd, 
Malicious wall, thus lovers to divide! 
Suppose, thou should'st a-while to us give place 
To lock, and fasten in a close embrace: 
But if too much to grant so sweet a bliss, 
Indulge at least the pleasure of a kiss. 
We scorn ingratitude: to thee, we know, 
This safe conveyance of our minds we owe. 

Thus they their vain petition did renew 
'Till night, and then they softly sigh'd adieu. 
But first they strove to kiss, and that was all; 
Their kisses dy'd untasted on the wall. 
Soon as the morn had o'er the stars prevail'd, 
And warm'd by Phoebus, flow'rs their dews exhal'd, 
The lovers to their well-known place return, 
Alike they suffer, and alike they mourn. 
At last their parents they resolve to cheat 
(If to deceive in love be call'd deceit), 
To steal by night from home, and thence unknown 
To seek the fields, and quit th' unfaithful town. 
But, to prevent their wand'ring in the dark, 
They both agree to fix upon a mark; 
A mark, that could not their designs expose: 
The tomb of Ninus was the mark they chose. 
There they might rest secure beneath the shade, 
Which boughs, with snowy fruit encumber'd, made: 
A wide-spread mulberry its rise had took 
Just on the margin of a gurgling brook. 
Impatient for the friendly dusk they stay; 
And chide the slowness of departing day; 
In western seas down sunk at last the light, 
From western seas up-rose the shades of night. 
The loving Thisbe ev'n prevents the hour, 
With cautious silence she unlocks the door, 
And veils her face, and marching thro' the gloom 
Swiftly arrives at th' assignation-tomb. 
For still the fearful sex can fearless prove; 
Boldly they act, if spirited by love. 
When lo! a lioness rush'd o'er the plain, 
Grimly besmear'd with blood of oxen slain: 
And what to the dire sight new horrors brought, 
To slake her thirst the neighb'ring spring she sought. 
Which, by the moon, when trembling Thisbe spies, 
Wing'd with her fear, swift, as the wind, she flies; 
And in a cave recovers from her fright, 
But drop'd her veil, confounded in her flight. 
When sated with repeated draughts, again 
The queen of beasts scour'd back along the plain, 
She found the veil, and mouthing it all o'er, 
With bloody jaws the lifeless prey she tore. 

The youth, who could not cheat his guards so soon, 
Late came, and noted by the glimm'ring moon 
Some savage feet, new printed on the ground, 
His cheeks turn'd pale, his limbs no vigour found; 
But when, advancing on, the veil he spied 
Distain'd with blood, and ghastly torn, he cried, 
One night shall death to two young lovers give, 
But she deserv'd unnumber'd years to live! 
'Tis I am guilty, I have thee betray'd, 
Who came not early, as my charming maid. 
Whatever slew thee, I the cause remain, 
I nam'd, and fix'd the place where thou wast slain. 
Ye lions from your neighb'ring dens repair, 
Pity the wretch, this impious body tear! 
But cowards thus for death can idly cry; 
The brave still have it in their pow'r to die. 
Then to th' appointed tree he hastes away, 
The veil first gather'd, tho' all rent it lay: 
The veil all rent yet still it self endears, 
He kist, and kissing, wash'd it with his tears. 
Tho' rich (he cry'd) with many a precious stain, 
Still from my blood a deeper tincture gain. 
Then in his breast his shining sword he drown'd, 
And fell supine, extended on the ground. 
As out again the blade lie dying drew, 
Out spun the blood, and streaming upwards flew. 
So if a conduit-pipe e'er burst you saw, 
Swift spring the gushing waters thro' the flaw: 
Then spouting in a bow, they rise on high, 
And a new fountain plays amid the sky. 
The berries, stain'd with blood, began to show 
A dark complexion, and forgot their snow; 
While fatten'd with the flowing gore, the root 
Was doom'd for ever to a purple fruit. 

Mean-time poor Thisbe fear'd, so long she stay'd, 
Her lover might suspect a perjur'd maid. 
Her fright scarce o'er, she strove the youth to find 
With ardent eyes, which spoke an ardent mind. 
Already in his arms, she hears him sigh 
At her destruction, which was once so nigh. 
The tomb, the tree, but not the fruit she knew, 
The fruit she doubted for its alter'd hue. 
Still as she doubts, her eyes a body found 
Quiv'ring in death, and gasping on the ground. 
She started back, the red her cheeks forsook, 
And ev'ry nerve with thrilling horrors shook. 
So trembles the smooth surface of the seas, 
If brush'd o'er gently with a rising breeze. 
But when her view her bleeding love confest, 
She shriek'd, she tore her hair, she beat her breast. 
She rais'd the body, and embrac'd it round, 
And bath'd with tears unfeign'd the gaping wound. 
Then her warm lips to the cold face apply'd, 
And is it thus, ah! thus we meet, she cry'd! 
My Pyramus! whence sprung thy cruel fate? 
My Pyramus!- ah! speak, ere 'tis too late. 
I, thy own Thisbe, but one word implore, 
One word thy Thisbe never ask'd before. 
At Thisbe's name, awak'd, he open'd wide 
His dying eyes; with dying eyes he try'd 
On her to dwell, but clos'd them slow, and dy'd. 

The fatal cause was now at last explor'd, 
Her veil she knew, and saw his sheathless sword: 
From thy own hand thy ruin thou hast found, 
She said, but love first taught that hand to wound, 
Ev'n I for thee as bold a hand can show, 
And love, which shall as true direct the blow. 
I will against the woman's weakness strive, 
And never thee, lamented youth, survive. 
The world may say, I caus'd, alas! thy death, 
But saw thee breathless, and resign'd my breath. 
Fate, tho' it conquers, shall no triumph gain, 
Fate, that divides us, still divides in vain. 

Now, both our cruel parents, hear my pray'r; 
My pray'r to offer for us both I dare; 
Oh! see our ashes in one urn confin'd, 
Whom love at first, and fate at last has join'd. 
The bliss, you envy'd, is not our request; 
Lovers, when dead, may sure together rest. 
Thou, tree, where now one lifeless lump is laid, 
Ere-long o'er two shalt cast a friendly shade. 
Still let our loves from thee be understood, 
Still witness in thy purple fruit our blood. 
She spoke, and in her bosom plung'd the sword, 
All warm and reeking from its slaughter'd lord. 
The pray'r, which dying Thisbe had preferr'd, 
Both Gods, and parents, with compassion heard. 
The whiteness of the mulberry soon fled, 
And rip'ning, sadden'd in a dusky red: 
While both their parents their lost children mourn, 
And mix their ashes in one golden urn. 

Thus did the melancholy tale conclude, 
And a short, silent interval ensu'd. 
The next in birth unloos'd her artful tongue, 
And drew attentive all the sister-throng. 

The Sun, the source of light, by beauty's pow'r 
Once am'rous grew; then hear the Sun's amour. 
Venus, and Mars, with his far-piercing eyes 
This God first spy'd; this God first all things spies. 
Stung at the sight, and swift on mischief bent, 
To haughty Juno's shapeless son he went: 
The Goddess, and her God gallant betray'd, 
And told the cuckold, where their pranks were play'd. 
Poor Vulcan soon desir'd to hear no more, 
He drop'd his hammer, and he shook all o'er: 
Then courage takes, and full of vengeful ire 
He heaves the bellows, and blows fierce the fire: 
From liquid brass, tho' sure, yet subtile snares 
He forms, and next a wond'rous net prepares, 
Drawn with such curious art, so nicely sly, 
Unseen the mashes cheat the searching eye. 
Not half so thin their webs the spiders weave, 
Which the most wary, buzzing prey deceive. 
These chains, obedient to the touch, he spread 
In secret foldings o'er the conscious bed: 
The conscious bed again was quickly prest 
By the fond pair, in lawless raptures blest. 
Mars wonder'd at his Cytherea's charms, 
More fast than ever lock'd within her arms. 
While Vulcan th' iv'ry doors unbarr'd with care, 
Then call'd the Gods to view the sportive pair: 
The Gods throng'd in, and saw in open day, 
Where Mars, and beauty's queen, all naked, lay. 
O! shameful sight, if shameful that we name, 
Which Gods with envy view'd, and could not blame; 
But, for the pleasure, wish'd to bear the shame. 
Each Deity, with laughter tir'd, departs, 
Yet all still laugh'd at Vulcan in their hearts. 

Thro' Heav'n the news of this surprizal run, 
But Venus did not thus forget the Sun. 
He, who stol'n transports idly had betray'd, 
By a betrayer was in kind repay'd. 
What now avails, great God, thy piercing blaze, 
That youth, and beauty, and those golden rays? 
Thou, who can'st warm this universe alone, 
Feel'st now a warmth more pow'rful than thy own: 
And those bright eyes, which all things should survey, 
Know not from fair Leucothoe to stray. 
The lamp of light, for human good design'd, 
Is to one virgin niggardly confin'd. 
Sometimes too early rise thy eastern beams, 
Sometimes too late they set in western streams: 
'Tis then her beauty thy swift course delays, 
And gives to winter skies long summer days. 
Now in thy face thy love-sick mind appears, 
And spreads thro' impious nations empty fears: 
For when thy beamless head is wrapt in night, 
Poor mortals tremble in despair of light. 
'Tis not the moon, that o'er thee casts a veil 
'Tis love alone, which makes thy looks so pale. 
Leucothoe is grown thy only care, 
Not Phaeton's fair mother now is fair. 
The youthful Rhodos moves no tender thought, 
And beauteous Porsa is at last forgot. 
Fond Clytie, scorn'd, yet lov'd, and sought thy bed, 
Ev'n then thy heart for other virgins bled. 
Leucothoe has all thy soul possest, 
And chas'd each rival passion from thy breast. 
To this bright nymph Eurynome gave birth 
In the blest confines of the spicy Earth. 
Excelling others, she herself beheld 
By her own blooming daughter far excell'd. 
The sire was Orchamus, whose vast command, 
The sev'nth from Belus, rul'd the Persian Land. 

Deep in cool vales, beneath th' Hesperian sky, 
For the Sun's fiery steeds the pastures lye. 
Ambrosia there they eat, and thence they gain 
New vigour, and their daily toils sustain. 
While thus on heav'nly food the coursers fed, 
And night, around, her gloomy empire spread, 
The God assum'd the mother's shape and air, 
And pass'd, unheeded, to his darling fair. 
Close by a lamp, with maids encompass'd round, 
The royal spinster, full employ'd, he found: 
Then cry'd, A-while from work, my daughter, rest; 
And, like a mother, scarce her lips he prest. 
Servants retire!- nor secrets dare to hear, 
Intrusted only to a daughter's ear. 
They swift obey'd: not one, suspicious, thought 
The secret, which their mistress would be taught. 
Then he: since now no witnesses are near, 
Behold! the God, who guides the various year! 
The world's vast eye, of light the source serene, 
Who all things sees, by whom are all things seen. 
Believe me, nymph! (for I the truth have show'd) 
Thy charms have pow'r to charm so great a God. 
Confus'd, she heard him his soft passion tell, 
And on the floor, untwirl'd, the spindle fell: 
Still from the sweet confusion some new grace 
Blush'd out by stealth, and languish'd in her face. 
The lover, now inflam'd, himself put on, 
And out at once the God, all-radiant, shone. 
The virgin startled at his alter'd form, 
Too weak to bear a God's impetuous storm: 
No more against the dazling youth she strove, 
But silent yielded, and indulg'd his love. 

This Clytie knew, and knew she was undone, 
Whose soul was fix'd, and doated on the Sun. 
She rag'd to think on her neglected charms, 
And Phoebus, panting in another's arms. 
With envious madness fir'd, she flies in haste, 
And tells the king, his daughter was unchaste. 
The king, incens'd to hear his honour stain'd, 
No more the father nor the man retain'd. 
In vain she stretch'd her arms, and turn'd her eyes 
To her lov'd God, th' enlightner of the skies. 
In vain she own'd it was a crime, yet still 
It was a crime not acted by her will. 
The brutal sire stood deaf to ev'ry pray'r, 
And deep in Earth entomb'd alive the fair. 
What Phoebus could do, was by Phoebus done: 
Full on her grave with pointed beams he shone: 
To pointed beams the gaping Earth gave way; 
Had the nymph eyes, her eyes had seen the day, 
But lifeless now, yet lovely still, she lay. 
Not more the God wept, when the world was fir'd, 
And in the wreck his blooming boy expir'd. 
The vital flame he strives to light again, 
And warm the frozen blood in ev'ry vein: 
But since resistless Fates deny'd that pow'r, 
On the cold nymph he rain'd a nectar show'r. 
Ah! undeserving thus (he said) to die, 
Yet still in odours thou shalt reach the sky. 
The body soon dissolv'd, and all around 
Perfum'd with heav'nly fragrancies the ground, 
A sacrifice for Gods up-rose from thence, 
A sweet, delightful tree of frankincense. 

Tho' guilty Clytie thus the sun betray'd, 
By too much passion she was guilty made. 
Excess of love begot excess of grief, 
Grief fondly bad her hence to hope relief. 
But angry Phoebus hears, unmov'd, her sighs, 
And scornful from her loath'd embraces flies. 
All day, all night, in trackless wilds, alone 
She pin'd, and taught the list'ning rocks her moan. 
On the bare earth she lies, her bosom bare, 
Loose her attire, dishevel'd is her hair. 
Nine times the morn unbarr'd the gates of light, 
As oft were spread th' alternate shades of night, 
So long no sustenance the mourner knew, 
Unless she drunk her tears, or suck'd the dew. 
She turn'd about, but rose not from the ground, 
Turn'd to the Sun, still as he roul'd his round: 
On his bright face hung her desiring eyes, 
'Till fix'd to Earth, she strove in vain to rise. 
Her looks their paleness in a flow'r retain'd, 
But here, and there, some purple streaks they gain'd. 
Still the lov'd object the fond leafs pursue, 
Still move their root, the moving Sun to view, 
And in the Heliotrope the nymph is true. 

The sisters heard these wonders with surprise, 
But part receiv'd them as romantick lies; 
And pertly rally'd, that they could not see 
In Pow'rs divine so vast an energy. 
Part own'd, true Gods such miracles might do, 
But own'd not Bacchus, one among the true. 
At last a common, just request they make, 
And beg Alcithoe her turn to take. 
I will (she said) and please you, if I can. 
Then shot her shuttle swift, and thus began. 

The fate of Daphnis is a fate too known, 
Whom an enamour'd nymph transform'd to stone, 
Because she fear'd another nymph might see 
The lovely youth, and love as much as she: 
So strange the madness is of jealousie! 
Nor shall I tell, what changes Scython made, 
And how he walk'd a man, or tripp'd a maid. 
You too would peevish frown, and patience want 
To hear, how Celmis grew an adamant. 
He once was dear to Jove, and saw of old 
Jove, when a child; but what he saw, he told. 
Crocus, and Smilax may be turn'd to flow'rs, 
And the Curetes spring from bounteous show'rs; 
I pass a hundred legends stale, as these, 
And with sweet novelty your taste will please. 

How Salmacis, with weak enfeebling streams 
Softens the body, and unnerves the limbs, 
And what the secret cause, shall here be shown; 
The cause is secret, but th' effect is known. 

The Naids nurst an infant heretofore, 
That Cytherea once to Hermes bore: 
From both th' illustrious authors of his race 
The child was nam'd, nor was it hard to trace 
Both the bright parents thro' the infant's face. 
When fifteen years in Ida's cool retreat 
The boy had told, he left his native seat, 
And sought fresh fountains in a foreign soil: 
The pleasure lessen'd the attending toil, 
With eager steps the Lycian fields he crost, 
A river here he view'd so lovely bright, 
It shew'd the bottom in a fairer light, 
Nor kept a sand conceal'd from human sight. 
The stream produc'd nor slimy ooze, nor weeds, 
Nor miry rushes, nor the spiky reeds; 
But dealt enriching moisture all around, 
The fruitful banks with chearful verdure crown'd, 
And kept the spring eternal on the ground. 
A nymph presides, not practis'd in the chace, 
Nor skilful at the bow, nor at the race; 
Of all the blue-ey'd daughters of the main, 
The only stranger to Diana's train: 
Her sisters often, as 'tis said, wou'd cry, 
"Fie Salmacis: what, always idle! fie. 
Or take thy quiver, or thy arrows seize, 
And mix the toils of hunting with thy ease." 
Nor quiver she nor arrows e'er wou'd seize, 
Nor mix the toils of hunting with her ease. 
But oft would bathe her in the chrystal tide, 
Oft with a comb her dewy locks divide; 
Now in the limpid streams she views her face, 
And drest her image in the floating glass: 
On beds of leaves she now repos'd her limbs, 
Now gather'd flow'rs that grew about her streams, 
And then by chance was gathering, as he stood 
To view the boy, and long'd for what she view'd. 

Fain wou'd she meet the youth with hasty feet, 
She fain wou'd meet him, but refus'd to meet 
Before her looks were set with nicest care, 
And well deserv'd to be reputed fair. 
"Bright youth," she cries, "whom all thy features prove 
A God, and, if a God, the God of love; 
But if a mortal, blest thy nurse's breast, 
Blest are thy parents, and thy sisters blest: 
But oh how blest! how more than blest thy bride, 
Ally'd in bliss, if any yet ally'd. 
If so, let mine the stoln enjoyments be; 
If not, behold a willing bride in me." 

The boy knew nought of love, and toucht with shame, 
He strove, and blusht, but still the blush became: 
In rising blushes still fresh beauties rose; 
The sunny side of fruit such blushes shows, 
And such the moon, when all her silver white 
Turns in eclipses to a ruddy light. 
The nymph still begs, if not a nobler bliss, 
A cold salute at least, a sister's kiss: 
And now prepares to take the lovely boy 
Between her arms. He, innocently coy, 
Replies, "Or leave me to my self alone, 
You rude uncivil nymph, or I'll be gone." 
"Fair stranger then," says she, "it shall be so"; 
And, for she fear'd his threats, she feign'd to go: 
But hid within a covert's neighbouring green, 
She kept him still in sight, herself unseen. 
The boy now fancies all the danger o'er, 
And innocently sports about the shore, 
Playful and wanton to the stream he trips, 
And dips his foot, and shivers as he dips. 
The coolness pleas'd him, and with eager haste 
His airy garments on the banks he cast; 
His godlike features, and his heav'nly hue, 
And all his beauties were expos'd to view. 
His naked limbs the nymph with rapture spies, 
While hotter passions in her bosom rise, 
Flush in her cheeks, and sparkle in her eyes. 
She longs, she burns to clasp him in her arms, 
And looks, and sighs, and kindles at his charms. 

Now all undrest upon the banks he stood, 
And clapt his sides, and leapt into the flood: 
His lovely limbs the silver waves divide, 
His limbs appear more lovely through the tide; 
As lillies shut within a chrystal case, 
Receive a glossy lustre from the glass. 
He's mine, he's all my own, the Naid cries, 
And flings off all, and after him she flies. 
And now she fastens on him as he swims, 
And holds him close, and wraps about his limbs. 
The more the boy resisted, and was coy, 
The more she clipt, and kist the strugling boy. 
So when the wrigling snake is snatcht on high 
In Eagle's claws, and hisses in the sky, 
Around the foe his twirling tail he flings, 
And twists her legs, and wriths about her wings. 

The restless boy still obstinately strove 
To free himself, and still refus'd her love. 
Amidst his limbs she kept her limbs intwin'd, 
"And why, coy youth," she cries, "why thus unkind! 
Oh may the Gods thus keep us ever join'd! 
Oh may we never, never part again!" 

So pray'd the nymph, nor did she pray in vain: 
For now she finds him, as his limbs she prest, 
Grow nearer still, and nearer to her breast; 
'Till, piercing each the other's flesh, they run 
Together, and incorporate in one: 
Last in one face are both their faces join'd, 
As when the stock and grafted twig combin'd 
Shoot up the same, and wear a common rind: 
Both bodies in a single body mix, 
A single body with a double sex. 

The boy, thus lost in woman, now survey'd 
The river's guilty stream, and thus he pray'd. 
(He pray'd, but wonder'd at his softer tone, 
Surpriz'd to hear a voice but half his own.) 
You parent-Gods, whose heav'nly names I bear, 
Hear your Hermaphrodite, and grant my pray'r; 
Oh grant, that whomsoe'er these streams contain, 
If man he enter'd, he may rise again 
Supple, unsinew'd, and but half a man! 

The heav'nly parents answer'd from on high, 
Their two-shap'd son, the double votary 
Then gave a secret virtue to the flood, 
And ting'd its source to make his wishes good. 

But Mineus' daughters still their tasks pursue, 
To wickedness most obstinately true: 
At Bacchus still they laugh, when all around, 
Unseen, the timbrels hoarse were heard to sound. 
Saffron and myrrh their fragrant odours shed, 
And now the present deity they dread. 
Strange to relate! Here ivy first was seen, 
Along the distaff crept the wond'rous green. 
Then sudden-springing vines began to bloom, 
And the soft tendrils curl'd around the loom: 
While purple clusters, dangling from on high, 
Ting'd the wrought purple with a second die. 

Now from the skies was shot a doubtful light, 
The day declining to the bounds of night. 
The fabrick's firm foundations shake all o'er, 
False tigers rage, and figur'd lions roar. 
Torches, aloft, seem blazing in the air, 
And angry flashes of red light'nings glare. 
To dark recesses, the dire sight to shun, 
Swift the pale sisters in confusion run. 
Their arms were lost in pinions, as they fled, 
And subtle films each slender limb o'er-spread. 
Their alter'd forms their senses soon reveal'd; 
Their forms, how alter'd, darkness still conceal'd. 
Close to the roof each, wond'ring, upwards springs, 
Born on unknown, transparent, plumeless wings. 
They strove for words; their little bodies found 
No words, but murmur'd in a fainting sound. 
In towns, not woods, the sooty bats delight, 
And, never, 'till the dusk, begin their flight; 
'Till Vesper rises with his ev'ning flame; 
From whom the Romans have deriv'd their name. 

The pow'r of Bacchus now o'er Thebes had flown: 
With awful rev'rence soon the God they own. 
Proud Ino, all around the wonder tells, 
And on her nephew deity still dwells. 
Of num'rous sisters, she alone yet knew 
No grief, but grief, which she from sisters drew. 

Imperial Juno saw her with disdain, 
Vain in her offspring, in her consort vain, 
Who rul'd the trembling Thebans with a nod, 
But saw her vainest in her foster-God. 
Could then (she cry'd) a bastard-boy have pow'r 
To make a mother her own son devour? 
Could he the Tuscan crew to fishes change, 
And now three sisters damn to forms so strange? 
Yet shall the wife of Jove find no relief? 
Shall she, still unreveng'd, disclose her grief? 
Have I the mighty freedom to complain? 
Is that my pow'r? is that to ease my pain? 
A foe has taught me vengeance; and who ought 
To scorn that vengeance, which a foe has taught? 
What sure destruction frantick rage can throw, 
The gaping wounds of slaughter'd Pentheus show. 
Why should not Ino, fir'd with madness, stray, 
Like her mad sisters her own kindred slay? 
Why, she not follow, where they lead the way? 

Down a steep, yawning cave, where yews display'd 
In arches meet, and lend a baleful shade, 
Thro' silent labyrinths a passage lies 
To mournful regions, and infernal skies. 
Here Styx exhales its noisome clouds, and here, 
The fun'ral rites once paid, all souls appear. 
Stiff cold, and horror with a ghastly face 
And staring eyes, infest the dreary place. 
Ghosts, new-arriv'd, and strangers to these plains, 
Know not the palace, where grim Pluto reigns. 
They journey doubtful, nor the road can tell, 
Which leads to the metropolis of Hell. 
A thousand avenues those tow'rs command, 
A thousand gates for ever open stand. 
As all the rivers, disembogu'd, find room 
For all their waters in old Ocean's womb: 
So this vast city worlds of shades receives, 
And space for millions still of worlds she leaves. 
Th' unbody'd spectres freely rove, and show 
Whate'er they lov'd on Earth, they love below. 
The lawyers still, or right, or wrong, support, 
The courtiers smoothly glide to Pluto's court. 
Still airy heroes thoughts of glory fire, 
Still the dead poet strings his deathless lyre, 
And lovers still with fancy'd darts expire. 

The Queen of Heaven, to gratify her hate, 
And sooth immortal wrath, forgets her state. 
Down from the realms of day, to realms of night, 
The Goddess swift precipitates her flight. 
At Hell arriv'd, the noise Hell's porter heard, 
Th' enormous dog his triple head up-rear'd: 
Thrice from three grizly throats he howl'd profound, 
Then suppliant couch'd, and stretch'd along the ground. 
The trembling threshold, which Saturnia prest, 
The weight of such divinity confest. 

Before a lofty, adamantine gate, 
Which clos'd a tow'r of brass, the Furies sate: 
Mis-shapen forms, tremendous to the sight, 
Th' implacable foul daughters of the night. 
A sounding whip each bloody sister shakes, 
Or from her tresses combs the curling snakes. 
But now great Juno's majesty was known; 
Thro' the thick gloom, all heav'nly bright, she shone: 
The hideous monsters their obedience show'd, 
And rising from their seats, submissive bow'd. 

This is the place of woe, here groan the dead; 
Huge Tityus o'er nine acres here is spread. 
Fruitful for pain th' immortal liver breeds, 
Still grows, and still th' insatiate vulture feeds. 
Poor Tantalus to taste the water tries, 
But from his lips the faithless water flies: 
Then thinks the bending tree he can command, 
The tree starts backwards, and eludes his hand. 
The labour too of Sisyphus is vain, 
Up the steep mount he heaves the stone with pain, 
Down from the summet rouls the stone again. 
The Belides their leaky vessels still 
Are ever filling, and yet never fill: 
Doom'd to this punishment for blood they shed, 
For bridegrooms slaughter'd in the bridal bed. 
Stretch'd on the rolling wheel Ixion lies; 
Himself he follows, and himself he flies. 
Ixion, tortur'd, Juno sternly ey'd, 
Then turn'd, and toiling Sisyphus espy'd: 
And why (she said) so wretched is the fate 
Of him, whose brother proudly reigns in state? 
Yet still my altars unador'd have been 
By Athamas, and his presumptuous queen. 

What caus'd her hate, the Goddess thus confest, 
What caus'd her journey now was more than guest. 
That hate, relentless, its revenge did want, 
And that revenge the Furies soon could grant: 
They could the glory of proud Thebes efface, 
And hide in ruin the Cadmean race. 
For this she largely promises, entreats, 
And to intreaties adds imperial threats. 

Then fell Tisiphone with rage was stung, 
And from her mouth th' untwisted serpents flung. 
To gain this trifling boon, there is no need 
(She cry'd) in formal speeches to proceed. 
Whatever thou command'st to do, is done; 
Believe it finish'd, tho' not yet begun. 
But from these melancholly seats repair 
To happier mansions, and to purer air. 
She spoke: the Goddess, darting upwards, flies, 
And joyous re-ascends her native skies: 
Nor enter'd there, till 'round her Iris threw 
Ambrosial sweets, and pour'd celestial dew. 

The faithful Fury, guiltless of delays, 
With cruel haste the dire command obeys. 
Girt in a bloody gown, a torch she shakes, 
And round her neck twines speckled wreaths of snakes. 
Fear, and dismay, and agonizing pain, 
With frantick rage, compleat her loveless train. 
To Thebes her flight she sped, and Hell forsook; 
At her approach the Theban turrets shook: 
The sun shrunk back, thick clouds the day o'er-cast, 
And springing greens were wither'd as she past. 

Now, dismal yellings heard, strange spectres seen, 
Confound as much the monarch as the queen. 
In vain to quit the palace they prepar'd, 
Tisiphone was there, and kept the ward. 
She wide extended her unfriendly arms, 
And all the Fury lavish'd all her harms. 
Part of her tresses loudly hiss, and part 
Spread poyson, as their forky tongues they dart. 
Then from her middle locks two snakes she drew, 
Whose merit from superior mischief grew: 
Th' envenom'd ruin, thrown with spiteful care, 
Clung to the bosoms of the hapless pair. 
The hapless pair soon with wild thoughts were fir'd, 
And madness, by a thousand ways inspir'd. 
'Tis true, th' unwounded body still was sound, 
But 'twas the soul which felt the deadly wound. 
Nor did th' unsated monster here give o'er, 
But dealt of plagues a fresh, unnumber'd store. 
Each baneful juice too well she understood, 
Foam, churn'd by Cerberus, and Hydra's blood. 
Hot hemlock, and cold aconite she chose, 
Delighted in variety of woes. 
Whatever can untune th' harmonious soul, 
And its mild, reas'ning faculties controul, 
Give false ideas, raise desires profane, 
And whirl in eddies the tumultuous brain, 
Mix'd with curs'd art, she direfully around 
Thro' all their nerves diffus'd the sad compound. 
Then toss'd her torch in circles still the same, 
Improv'd their rage, and added flame to flame. 
The grinning Fury her own conquest spy'd, 
And to her rueful shades return'd with pride, 
And threw th' exhausted, useless snakes aside. 

Now Athamas cries out, his reason fled, 
Here, fellow-hunters, let the toils be spread. 
I saw a lioness, in quest of food, 
With her two young, run roaring in this wood. 
Again the fancy'd savages were seen, 
As thro' his palace still he chac'd his queen; 
Then tore Learchus from her breast: the child 
Stretch'd little arms, and on its father smil'd: 
A father now no more, who now begun 
Around his head to whirl his giddy son, 
And, quite insensible to Nature's call, 
The helpless infant flung against the wall. 
The same mad poyson in the mother wrought, 
Young Melicerta in her arms she caught, 
And with disorder'd tresses, howling, flies, 
O! Bacchus, Evoe, Bacchus! loud she cries. 
The name of Bacchus Juno laugh'd to hear, 
And said, Thy foster-God has cost thee dear. 

A rock there stood, whose side the beating waves 
Had long consum'd, and hollow'd into caves. 
The head shot forwards in a bending steep, 
And cast a dreadful covert o'er the deep. 
The wretched Ino, on destruction bent, 
Climb'd up the cliff; such strength her fury lent: 
Thence with her guiltless boy, who wept in vain, 
At one bold spring she plung'd into the main. 

Her neice's fate touch'd Cytherea's breast, 
And in soft sounds she Neptune thus addrest: 
Great God of waters, whose extended sway 
Is next to his, whom Heav'n and Earth obey: 
Let not the suit of Venus thee displease, 
Pity the floaters on th' Ionian seas. 
Encrease thy Subject-Gods, nor yet disdain 
To add my kindred to that glorious train. 
If from the sea I may such honours claim, 
If 'tis desert, that from the sea I came, 
As Grecian poets artfully have sung, 
And in the name confest, from whence I sprung. 

Pleas'd Neptune nodded his assent, and free 
Both soon became from frail mortality. 
He gave them form, and majesty divine, 
And bad them glide along the foamy brine. 
For Melicerta is Palaemon known, 
And Ino once, Leucothoe is grown. 

The Theban matrons their lov'd queen pursu'd, 
And tracing to the rock, her footsteps view'd. 
Too certain of her fate, they rend the skies 
With piteous shrieks, and lamentable cries. 
All beat their breasts, and Juno all upbraid, 
Who still remember'd a deluded maid: 
Who, still revengeful for one stol'n embrace, 
Thus wreak'd her hate on the Cadmean race. 
This Juno heard: And shall such elfs, she cry'd, 
Dispute my justice, or my pow'r deride? 
You too shall feel my wrath not idly spent; 
A Goddess never for insults was meant. 

She, who lov'd most, and who most lov'd had been, 
Said, Not the waves shall part me from my queen. 
She strove to plunge into the roaring flood; 
Fix'd to the stone, a stone her self she stood. 
This, on her breast would fain her blows repeat, 
Her stiffen'd hands refus'd her breast to beat. 
That, stretch'd her arms unto the seas; in vain 
Her arms she labour'd to unstretch again. 
To tear her comely locks another try'd, 
Both comely locks, and fingers petryfi'd. 
Part thus; but Juno with a softer mind 
Part doom'd to mix among the feather'd kind. 
Transform'd, the name of Theban birds they keep, 
And skim the surface of that fatal deep. 

Mean-time, the wretched Cadmus mourns, nor knows, 
That they who mortal fell, immortal rose. 
With a long series of new ills opprest, 
He droops, and all the man forsakes his breast. 
Strange prodigies confound his frighted eyes; 
From the fair city, which he rais'd, he flies: 
As if misfortune not pursu'd his race, 
But only hung o'er that devoted place. 
Resolv'd by sea to seek some distant land, 
At last he safely gain'd th' Illyrian strand. 
Chearless himself, his consort still he chears, 
Hoary, and loaden'd both with woes and years. 
Then to recount past sorrows they begin, 
And trace them to the gloomy origin. 
That serpent sure was hallow'd, Cadmus cry'd, 
Which once my spear transfix'd with foolish pride; 
When the big teeth, a seed before unknown, 
By me along the wond'ring glebe were sown, 
And sprouting armies by themselves o'erthrown. 
If thence the wrath of Heav'n on me is bent, 
May Heav'n conclude it with one sad event; 
To an extended serpent change the man: 
And while he spoke, the wish'd-for change began. 
His skin with sea-green spots was vary'd 'round, 
And on his belly prone he prest the ground. 
He glitter'd soon with many a golden scale, 
And his shrunk legs clos'd in a spiry tail. 
Arms yet remain'd, remaining arms he spread 
To his lov'd wife, and human tears yet shed. 
Come, my Harmonia, come, thy face recline 
Down to my face; still touch, what still is mine. 
O! let these hands, while hands, be gently prest, 
While yet the serpent has not all possest. 
More he had spoke, but strove to speak in vain, 
The forky tongue refus'd to tell his pain, 
And learn'd in hissings only to complain. 

Then shriek'd Harmonia, Stay, my Cadmus, stay, 
Glide not in such a monstrous shape away! 
Destruction, like impetuous waves, rouls on. 
Where are thy feet, thy legs, thy shoulders gone? 
Chang'd is thy visage, chang'd is all thy frame; 
Cadmus is only Cadmus now in name. 
Ye Gods, my Cadmus to himself restore, 
Or me like him transform; I ask no more. 

The husband-serpent show'd he still had thought, 
With wonted fondness an embrace he sought; 
Play'd 'round her neck in many a harmless twist, 
And lick'd that bosom, which, a man, he kist. 
The lookers-on (for lookers-on there were) 
Shock'd at the sight, half-dy'd away with fear. 
The transformation was again renew'd, 
And, like the husband, chang'd the wife they view'd. 
Both, serpents now, with fold involv'd in fold, 
To the next covert amicably roul'd. 
There curl'd they lie, or wave along the green, 
Fearless see men, by men are fearless seen, 
Still mild, and conscious what they once have been. 

Yet tho' this harsh, inglorious fate they found, 
Each in the deathless grandson liv'd renown'd. 
Thro' conquer'd India Bacchus nobly rode, 
And Greece with temples hail'd the conqu'ring God. 
In Argos only proud Acrisius reign'd, 
Who all the consecrated rites profan'd. 
Audacious wretch! thus Bacchus to deny, 
And the great Thunderer's great son defie! 
Nor him alone: thy daughter vainly strove, 
Brave Perseus of celestial stem to prove, 
And her self pregnant by a golden Jove. 
Yet this was true, and truth in time prevails; 
Acrisius now his unbelief bewails. 
His former thought, an impious thought he found, 
And both the heroe, and the God were own'd. 
He saw, already one in Heav'n was plac'd, 
And one with more than mortal triumphs grac'd, 
The victor Perseus with the Gorgon-head, 
O'er Libyan sands his airy journey sped. 
The gory drops distill'd, as swift he flew, 
And from each drop envenom'd serpents grew, 
The mischiefs brooded on the barren plains, 
And still th' unhappy fruitfulness remains. 

Thence Perseus, like a cloud, by storms was driv'n, 
Thro' all th' expanse beneath the cope of Heaven. 
The jarring winds unable to controul, 
He saw the southern, and the northern pole: 
And eastward thrice, and westward thrice was whirl'd, 
And from the skies survey'd the nether world. 
But when grey ev'ning show'd the verge of night, 
He fear'd in darkness to pursue his flight. 
He pois'd his pinions, and forgot to soar, 
And sinking, clos'd them on th' Hesperian shore: 
Then beg'd to rest, 'till Lucifer begun 
To wake the morn, the morn to wake the sun. 

Here Atlas reign'd, of more than human size, 
And in his kingdom the world's limit lies. 
Here Titan bids his weary'd coursers sleep, 
And cools the burning axle in the deep. 
The mighty monarch, uncontrol'd, alone, 
His sceptre sways: no neighb'ring states are known. 
A thousand flocks on shady mountains fed, 
A thousand herds o'er grassy plains were spread. 
Here wond'rous trees their shining stores unfold, 
Their shining stores too wond'rous to be told, 
Their leafs, their branches, and their apples, gold. 
Then Perseus the gigantick prince addrest, 
Humbly implor'd a hospitable rest. 
If bold exploits thy admiration fire, 
He said, I fancy, mine thou wilt admire. 
Or if the glory of a race can move, 
Not mean my glory, for I spring from Jove. 
At this confession Atlas ghastly star'd, 
Mindful of what an oracle declar'd, 
That the dark womb of Time conceal'd a day, 
Which should, disclos'd, the bloomy gold betray: 
All should at once be ravish'd from his eyes, 
And Jove's own progeny enjoy the prize. 
For this, the fruit he loftily immur'd, 
And a fierce dragon the strait pass secur'd. 
For this, all strangers he forbad to land, 
And drove them from th' inhospitable strand. 
To Perseus then: Fly quickly, fly this coast, 
Nor falsly dare thy acts and race to boast. 
In vain the heroe for one night entreats, 
Threat'ning he storms, and next adds force to threats. 
By strength not Perseus could himself defend, 
For who in strength with Atlas could contend? 
But since short rest to me thou wilt not give, 
A gift of endless rest from me receive, 
He said, and backward turn'd, no more conceal'd 
The present, and Medusa's head reveal'd. 
Soon the high Atlas a high mountain stood, 
His locks, and beard became a leafy wood. 
His hands, and shoulders, into ridges went, 
The summit-head still crown'd the steep ascent. 
His bones a solid, rocky hardness gain'd: 
He, thus immensely grown (as fate ordain'd), 
The stars, the Heav'ns, and all the Gods sustain'd. 

Now Aeolus had with strong chains confin'd, 
And deep imprison'd e'vry blust'ring wind, 
The rising Phospher with a purple light 
Did sluggish mortals to new toils invite. 
His feet again the valiant Perseus plumes, 
And his keen sabre in his hand resumes: 
Then nobly spurns the ground, and upwards springs, 
And cuts the liquid air with sounding wings. 
O'er various seas, and various lands he past, 
'Till Aethiopia's shore appear'd at last. 
Andromeda was there, doom'd to attone 
By her own ruin follies not her own: 
And if injustice in a God can be, 
Such was the Libyan God's unjust decree. 
Chain'd to a rock she stood; young Perseus stay'd 
His rapid flight, to view the beauteous maid. 
So sweet her frame, so exquisitely fine, 
She seem'd a statue by a hand divine, 
Had not the wind her waving tresses show'd, 
And down her cheeks the melting sorrows flow'd. 
Her faultless form the heroe's bosom fires; 
The more he looks, the more he still admires. 
Th' admirer almost had forgot to fly, 
And swift descended, flutt'ring from on high. 
O! Virgin, worthy no such chains to prove, 
But pleasing chains in the soft folds of love; 
Thy country, and thy name (he said) disclose, 
And give a true rehearsal of thy woes. 

A quick reply her bashfulness refus'd, 
To the free converse of a man unus'd. 
Her rising blushes had concealment found 
From her spread hands, but that her hands were bound. 
She acted to her full extent of pow'r, 
And bath'd her face with a fresh, silent show'r. 
But by degrees in innocence grown bold, 
Her name, her country, and her birth she told: 
And how she suffer'd for her mother's pride, 
Who with the Nereids once in beauty vy'd. 
Part yet untold, the seas began to roar, 
And mounting billows tumbled to the shore. 
Above the waves a monster rais'd his head, 
His body o'er the deep was widely spread: 
Onward he flounc'd; aloud the virgin cries; 
Each parent to her shrieks in shrieks replies: 
But she had deepest cause to rend the skies. 
Weeping, to her they cling; no sign appears 
Of help, they only lend their helpless tears. 
Too long you vent your sorrows, Perseus said, 
Short is the hour, and swift the time of aid, 
In me the son of thund'ring Jove behold, 
Got in a kindly show'r of fruitful gold. 
Medusa's snaky head is now my prey, 
And thro' the clouds I boldly wing my way. 
If such desert be worthy of esteem, 
And, if your daughter I from death redeem, 
Shall she be mine? Shall it not then be thought, 
A bride, so lovely, was too cheaply bought? 
For her my arms I willingly employ, 
If I may beauties, which I save, enjoy. 
The parents eagerly the terms embrace: 
For who would slight such terms in such a case? 
Nor her alone they promise, but beside, 
The dowry of a kingdom with the bride. 

As well-rigg'd gallies, which slaves, sweating, row, 
With their sharp beaks the whiten'd ocean plough; 
So when the monster mov'd, still at his back 
The furrow'd waters left a foamy track. 
Now to the rock he was advanc'd so nigh, 
Whirl'd from a sling a stone the space would fly. 
Then bounding, upwards the brave Perseus sprung, 
And in mid air on hov'ring pinions hung. 
His shadow quickly floated on the main; 
The monster could not his wild rage restrain, 
But at the floating shadow leap'd in vain. 
As when Jove's bird, a speckl'd serpent spies, 
Which in the shine of Phoebus basking lies, 
Unseen, he souses down, and bears away, 
Truss'd from behind, the vainly-hissing prey. 
To writh his neck the labour nought avails, 
Too deep th' imperial talons pierce his scales. 
Thus the wing'd heroe now descends, now soars, 
And at his pleasure the vast monster gores. 
Full in his back, swift stooping from above, 
The crooked sabre to its hilt he drove. 
The monster rag'd, impatient of the pain, 
First bounded high, and then sunk low again. 
Now, like a savage boar, when chaf'd with wounds, 
And bay'd with opening mouths of hungry hounds, 
He on the foe turns with collected might, 
Who still eludes him with an airy flight; 
And wheeling round, the scaly armour tries 
Of his thick sides; his thinner tall now plies: 
'Till from repeated strokes out gush'd a flood, 
And the waves redden'd with the streaming blood. 
At last the dropping wings, befoam'd all o'er, 
With flaggy heaviness their master bore: 
A rock he spy'd, whose humble head was low, 
Bare at an ebb, but cover'd at a flow. 
A ridgy hold, he, thither flying, gain'd, 
And with one hand his bending weight sustain'd; 
With th' other, vig'rous blows he dealt around, 
And the home-thrusts the expiring monster own'd. 
In deaf'ning shouts the glad applauses rise, 
And peal on peal runs ratling thro' the skies. 
The saviour-youth the royal pair confess, 
And with heav'd hands their daughter's bridegroom bless.

The beauteous bride moves on, now loos'd from chains, 
The cause, and sweet reward of all the heroe's pains, 

Mean-time, on shore triumphant Perseus stood, 
And purg'd his hands, smear'd with the monster's blood: 
Then in the windings of a sandy bed 
Compos'd Medusa's execrable head. 
But to prevent the roughness, leafs he threw, 
And young, green twigs, which soft in waters grew, 
There soft, and full of sap; but here, when lay'd, 
Touch'd by the head, that softness soon decay'd. 
The wonted flexibility quite gone, 
The tender scyons harden'd into stone. 
Fresh, juicy twigs, surpriz'd, the Nereids brought, 
Fresh, juicy twigs the same contagion caught. 
The nymphs the petrifying seeds still keep, 
And propagate the wonder thro' the deep. 
The pliant sprays of coral yet declare 
Their stiff'ning Nature, when expos'd to air. 
Those sprays, which did, like bending osiers, move, 
Snatch'd from their element, obdurate prove, 
And shrubs beneath the waves, grow stones above. 

The great immortals grateful Perseus prais'd, 
And to three Pow'rs three turfy altars rais'd. 
To Hermes this; and that he did assign 
To Pallas: the mid honours, Jove, were thine, 
He hastes for Pallas a white cow to cull, 
A calf for Hermes, but for Jove a bull. 
Then seiz'd the prize of his victorious fight, 
Andromeda, and claim'd the nuptial rite. 
Andromeda alone he greatly sought, 
The dowry kingdom was not worth his thought. 

Pleas'd Hymen now his golden torch displays; 
With rich oblations fragrant altars blaze, 
Sweet wreaths of choicest flow'rs are hung on high, 
And cloudless pleasure smiles in ev'ry eye. 
The melting musick melting thoughts inspires, 
And warbling songsters aid the warbling lyres. 
The palace opens wide in pompous state, 
And by his peers surrounded, Cepheus sate. 
A feast was serv'd, fit for a king to give, 
And fit for God-like heroes to receive. 
The banquet ended, the gay, chearful bowl 
Mov'd round, and brighten'd, and enlarg'd each soul. 
Then Perseus ask'd, what customs there obtain'd, 
And by what laws the people were restrain'd. 
Which told; the teller a like freedom takes, 
And to the warrior his petition makes, 
To know, what arts had won Medusa's snakes. 

The heroe with his just request complies, 
Shows, how a vale beneath cold Atlas lies, 
Where, with aspiring mountains fenc'd around, 
He the two daughters of old Phorcus found. 
Fate had one common eye to both assign'd, 
Each saw by turns, and each by turns was blind. 
But while one strove to lend her sister sight, 
He stretch'd his hand, and stole their mutual light, 
And left both eyeless, both involv'd in night. 
Thro' devious wilds, and trackless woods he past, 
And at the Gorgon-seats arriv'd at last: 
But as he journey'd, pensive he survey'd, 
What wasteful havock dire Medusa made. 
Here, stood still breathing statues, men before; 
There, rampant lions seem'd in stone to roar. 
Nor did he, yet affrighted, quit the field, 
But in the mirror of his polish'd shield 
Reflected saw Medusa slumbers take, 
And not one serpent by good chance awake. 
Then backward an unerring blow he sped, 
And from her body lop'd at once her head. 
The gore prolifick prov'd; with sudden force 
Sprung Pegasus, and wing'd his airy course. 

The Heav'n-born warrior faithfully went on, 
And told the num'rous dangers which he run. 
What subject seas, what lands he had in view, 
And nigh what stars th' advent'rous heroe flew. 
At last he silent sate; the list'ning throng 
Sigh'd at the pause of his delightful tongue. 
Some beg'd to know, why this alone should wear, 
Of all the sisters, such destructive hair. 

Great Perseus then: With me you shall prevail, 
Worth the relation, to relate a tale. 
Medusa once had charms; to gain her love 
A rival crowd of envious lovers strove. 
They, who have seen her, own, they ne'er did trace 
More moving features in a sweeter face. 
Yet above all, her length of hair, they own, 
In golden ringlets wav'd, and graceful shone. 
Her Neptune saw, and with such beauties fir'd, 
Resolv'd to compass, what his soul desir'd. 
In chaste Minerva's fane, he, lustful, stay'd, 
And seiz'd, and rifled the young, blushing maid. 
The bashful Goddess turn'd her eyes away, 
Nor durst such bold impurity survey; 
But on the ravish'd virgin vengeance takes, 
Her shining hair is chang'd to hissing snakes. 
These in her Aegis Pallas joys to bear, 
The hissing snakes her foes more sure ensnare, 
Than they did lovers once, when shining hair. 

While Perseus entertain'd with this report 
His father Cepheus, and the list'ning court, 
Within the palace walls was heard aloud 
The roaring noise of some unruly crowd; 
Not like the songs which chearful friends prepare 
For nuptial days, but sounds that threaten'd war; 
And all the pleasures of this happy feast, 
To tumult turn'd, in wild disorder ceas'd: 
So, when the sea is calm, we often find 
A storm rais'd sudden by some furious wind. 
Chief in the riot Phineus first appear'd, 
The rash ringleader of this boist'rous herd, 
And brandishing his brazen-pointed lance, 
Behold, he said, an injur'd man advance, 
Stung with resentment for his ravish'd wife, 
Nor shall thy wings, o Perseus, save thy life; 
Nor Jove himself; tho' we've been often told 
Who got thee in the form of tempting gold. 
His lance was aim'd, when Cepheus ran, and said, 
Hold, brother, hold; what brutal rage has made 
Your frantick mind so black a crime conceive? 
Are these the thanks that you to Perseus give? 
This the reward that to his worth you pay, 
Whose timely valour sav'd Andromeda? 
Nor was it he, if you would reason right, 
That forc'd her from you, but the jealous spight 
Of envious Nereids, and Jove's high decree; 
And that devouring monster of the sea, 
That ready with his jaws wide gaping stood 
To eat my child, the fairest of my blood. 
You lost her then, when she seem'd past relief, 
And wish'd perhaps her death, to ease your grief 
With my afflictions: not content to view 
Andromeda in chains, unhelp'd by you, 
Her spouse, and uncle; will you grieve that he 
Expos'd his life the dying maid to free? 
And shall you claim his merit? Had you thought 
Her charms so great, you shou'd have bravely sought 
That blessing on the rocks, where fix'd she lay: 
But now let Perseus bear his prize away, 
By service gain'd, by promis'd faith possess'd; 
To him I owe it, that my age is bless'd 
Still with a child: Nor think that I prefer 
Perseus to thee, but to the loss of her. 

Phineus on him, and Perseus, roul'd about 
His eyes in silent rage, and seem'd to doubt 
Which to destroy; 'till, resolute at length, 
He threw his spear with the redoubled strength 
His fury gave him, and at Perseus struck; 
But missing Perseus, in his seat it stuck. 
Who, springing nimbly up, return'd the dart, 
And almost plung'd it in his rival's heart; 
But he for safety to the altar ran, 
Unfit protection for so vile a man; 
Yet was the stroke not vain, as Rhaetus found, 
Who in his brow receiv'd a mortal wound; 
Headlong he tumbled, when his skull was broke, 
From which his friends the fatal weapon took, 
While he lay trembling, and his gushing blood 
In crimson streams around the table flow'd. 

But this provok'd th' unruly rabble worse, 
They flung their darts, and some in loud discourse 
To death young Perseus, and the monarch doom; 
But Cepheus left before the guilty room, 
With grief appealing to the Gods above, 
Who laws of hospitality approve, 
Who faith protect, and succour injur'd right, 
That he was guiltless of this barb'rous fight. 

Pallas her brother Perseus close attends, 
And with her ample shield from harm defends, 
Raising a sprightly courage in his heart: 
But Indian Athis took the weaker part, 
Born in the chrystal grottoes of the sea, 
Limnate's son, a fenny nymph, and she 
Daughter of Ganges; graceful was his mein, 
His person lovely, and his age sixteen. 
His habit made his native beauty more; 
A purple mantle fring'd with gold he wore; 
His neck well-turn'd with golden chains was grac'd, 
His hair with myrrh perfum'd, was nicely dress'd. 
Tho' with just aim he cou'd the javelin throw, 
Yet with more skill he drew the bending bow; 
And now was drawing it with artful hand, 
When Perseus snatching up a flaming brand, 
Whirl'd sudden at his face the burning wood, 
Crush'd his eyes in, and quench'd the fire with blood; 
Thro' the soft skin the splinter'd bones appear, 
And spoil'd the face that lately was so fair. 

When Lycabas his Athis thus beheld, 
How was his heart with friendly horror fill'd! 
A youth so noble, to his soul so dear, 
To see his shapeless look, his dying groans to hear! 
He snatch'd the bow the boy was us'd to bend, 
And cry'd, With me, false traytor, dare contend; 
Boast not a conquest o'er a child, but try 
Thy strength with me, who all thy pow'rs defy; 
Nor think so mean an act a victory. 
While yet he spoke he flung the whizzing dart, 
Which pierc'd the plaited robe, but miss'd his heart: 
Perseus defy'd, upon him fiercely press'd 
With sword, unsheath'd, and plung'd it in his breast; 
His eyes o'erwhelm'd with night, he stumbling falls, 
And with his latest breath on Athis calls; 
Pleas'd that so near the lovely youth he lies, 
He sinks his head upon his friend, and dies. 

Next eager Phorbas, old Methion's son, 
Came rushing forward with Amphimedon; 
When the smooth pavement, slippery made with gore, 
Trip'd up their feet, and flung 'em on the floor; 
The sword of Perseus, who by chance was nigh, 
Prevents their rise, and where they fall, they lye: 
Full in his ribs Amphimedon he smote, 
And then stuck fiery Phorbas in the throat. 
Eurythus lifting up his ax, the blow 
Was thus prevented by his nimble foe; 
A golden cup he seizes, high embost, 
And at his head the massy goblet tost: 
It hits, and from his forehead bruis'd rebounds, 
And blood, and brains he vomits from his wounds; 
With his slain fellows on the floor he lies, 
And death for ever shuts his swimming eyes. 
Then Polydaemon fell, a Goddess-born; 
Phlegias, and Elycen with locks unshorn 
Next follow'd; next, the stroke of death he gave 
To Clytus, Abanis, and Lycetus brave; 
While o'er unnumber'd heaps of ghastly dead, 
The Argive heroe's feet triumphant tread. 

But Phineus stands aloof, and dreads to feel 
His rival's force, and flies his pointed steel: 
Yet threw a dart from far; by chance it lights 
On Idas, who for neither party fights; 
But wounded, sternly thus to Phineus said, 
Since of a neuter thou a foe hast made, 
This I return thee, drawing from his side 
The dart; which, as he strove to fling, he dy'd. 
Odites fell by Clymenus's sword, 
The Cephen court had not a greater lord. 
Hypseus his blade does in Protenor sheath, 
But brave Lyncides soon reveng'd his death. 
Here too was old Emathion, one that fear'd 
The Gods, and in the cause of Heav'n appear'd, 
Who only wishing the success of right, 
And, by his age, exempted from the fight, 
Both sides alike condemns: This impious war 
Cease, cease, he cries; these bloody broils forbear. 
This scarce the sage with high concern had said, 
When Chromis at a blow struck off his head, 
Which dropping, on the royal altar roul'd, 
Still staring on the crowd with aspect bold; 
And still it seem'd their horrid strife to blame, 
In life and death, his pious zeal the same; 
While clinging to the horns, the trunk expires, 
The sever'd head consumes amidst the fires. 

Then Phineus, who from far his javelin threw, 
Broteas and Ammon, twins and brothers, slew; 
For knotted gauntlets matchless in the field; 
But gauntlets must to swords and javelins yield. 
Ampycus next, with hallow'd fillets bound, 
As Ceres' priest, and with a mitre crown'd, 
His spear transfix'd, and struck him to the ground. 

O Iapetides, with pain I tell 
How you, sweet lyrist, in the riot fell; 
What worse than brutal rage his breast could fill, 
Who did thy blood, o bard celestial! spill? 
Kindly you press'd amid the princely throng, 
To crown the feast, and give the nuptial song: 
Discord abhorr'd the musick of thy lyre, 
Whose notes did gentle peace so well inspire; 
Thee, when fierce Pettalus far off espy'd, 
Defenceless with thy harp, he scoffing cry'd, 
Go; to the ghosts thy soothing lessons play; 
We loath thy lyre, and scorn thy peaceful lay: 
And, as again he fiercely bid him go, 
He pierc'd his temples with a mortal blow. 
His harp he held, tho' sinking on the ground, 
Whose strings in death his trembling fingers found 
By chance, and tun'd by chance a dying sound. 

With grief Lycormas saw him fall, from far, 
And, wresting from the door a massy bar, 
Full in his poll lays on a load of knocks, 
Which stun him, and he falls like a devoted ox. 
Another bar Pelates would have snach'd, 
But Corynthus his motions slily watch'd; 
He darts his weapon from a private stand, 
And rivets to the post his veiny hand: 
When strait a missive spear transfix'd his side, 
By Abas thrown, and as he hung, he dy'd. 

Melaneus on the prince's side was slain; 
And Dorylas, who own'd a fertile plain, 
Of Nasamonia's fields the wealthy lord, 
Whose crowded barns, could scarce contain their board. 
A whizzing spear obliquely gave a blow, 
Stuck in his groin, and pierc'd the nerves below; 
His foe behld his eyes convulsive roul, 
His ebbing veins, and his departing soul; 
Then taunting said, Of all thy spacious plain, 
This spot thy only property remains. 
He left him thus; but had no sooner left, 
Than Perseus in revenge his nostrils cleft; 
From his friend's breast the murd'ring dart he drew, 
And the same weapon at the murderer threw; 
His head in halves the darted javelin cut, 
And on each side the brain came issuing out. 

Fortune his friend, in deaths around he deals, 
And this his lance, and that his faulchion feels: 
Now Clytius dies; and by a diff'rent wound, 
The twin, his brother Clanis, bites the ground. 
In his rent jaw the bearded weapon sticks, 
And the steel'd dart does Clytius' thigh transfix. 
With these Mendesian Celadon he slew: 
And Astreus next, whose mother was a Jew, 
His sire uncertain: then by Perseus fell 
Aethion, who cou'd things to come foretell; 
But now he knows not whence the javelin flies 
That wounds his breast, nor by whose arm he dies. 

The squire to Phineus next his valour try'd, 
And fierce Agyrtes stain'd with paricide. 

As these are slain, fresh numbers still appear, 
And wage with Perseus an unequal war; 
To rob him of his right, the maid he won, 
By honour, promise, and desert his own. 
With him, the father of the beauteous bride, 
The mother, and the frighted virgin side; 
With shrieks, and doleful cries they rend the air: 
Their shrieks confounded with the din of war, 
With dashing arms, and groanings of the slain, 
They grieve unpitied, and unheard complain. 
The floor with ruddy streams Bellona stains, 
And Phineus a new war with double rage maintains. 

Perseus begirt, from all around they pour 
Their lances on him, a tempestuous show'r, 
Aim'd all at him; a cloud of darts, and spears, 
Or blind his eyes, or whistle round his ears. 
Their numbers to resist, against the wall 
He guards his back secure, and dares them all. 
Here from the left Molpeus renews the fight, 
And bold Ethemon presses on the right: 
As when a hungry tyger near him hears 
Two lowing herds, a-while he both forbears; 
Nor can his hopes of this, or that renounce, 
So strong he lusts to prey on both at once; 
Thus Perseus now with that, or this is loth 
To war distinct:, but fain would fall on both. 
And first Chaonian Molpeus felt his blow, 
And fled, and never after fac'd his foe; 
Then fierce Ethemon, as he turn'd his back, 
Hurried with fury, aiming at his neck, 
His brandish'd sword against the marble struck 
With all his might; the brittle weapon broke, 
And in his throat the point rebounding stuck. 
Too slight the wound for life to issue thence, 
And yet too great for battel, or defence; 
His arms extended in this piteous state, 
For mercy he wou'd sue, but sues too late; 
Perseus has in his bosom plung'd the sword, 
And, ere he speaks, the wound prevents the word. 

The crowds encreasing, and his friends distress'd, 
Himself by warring multitudes oppress'd: 
Since thus unequally you fight, 'tis time, 
He cry'd, to punish your presumptuous crime; 
Beware, my friends; his friends were soon prepar'd, 
Their sight averting, high the head he rear'd, 
And Gorgon on his foes severely star'd. 
Vain shift! says Thescelus, with aspect bold, 
Thee, and thy bugbear monster, I behold 
With scorn; he lifts his arm, but ere he threw 
The dart, the heroe to a statue grew. 
In the same posture still the marble stands, 
And holds the warrior's weapons in its hands. 
Amphyx, whom yet this wonder can't alarm, 
Heaves at Lyncides' breast his impious arm; 
But, while thus daringly he presses on, 
His weapon and his arm are turn'd to stone. 
Next Nileus, he who vainly said he ow'd 
His origin to Nile's prolifick flood; 
Who on his shield seven silver rivers bore, 
His birth to witness by the arms he wore; 
Full of his sev'n-fold father, thus express'd 
His boast to Perseus, and his pride confess'd: 
See whence we sprung; let this thy comfort be 
In thy sure death, that thou didst die by me. 
While yet he spoke, the dying accents hung 
In sounds imperfect on his marble tongue; 
Tho' chang'd to stone, his lips he seem'd to stretch, 
And thro' th' insensate rock wou'd force a speech. 

This Eryx saw, but seeing wou'd not own; 
The mischief by your selves, he cries, is done, 
'Tis your cold courage turns your hearts to stone. 
Come, follow me; fall on the stripling boy, 
Kill him, and you his magick arms destroy. 
Then rushing on, his arm to strike he rear'd, 
And marbled o'er his varied frame appear'd. 

These for affronting Pallas were chastis'd, 
And justly met the death they had despis'd. 
But brave Aconteus, Perseus' friend, by chance 
Look'd back, and met the Gorgon's fatal glance: 
A statue now become, he ghastly stares, 
And still the foe to mortal combat dares. 
Astyages the living likeness knew, 
On the dead stone with vengeful fury flew; 
But impotent his rage, the jarring blade 
No print upon the solid marble made: 
Again, as with redoubled might he struck, 
Himself astonish'd in the quarry stuck. 

The vulgar deaths 'twere tedious to rehearse, 
And fates below the dignity of verse; 
Their safety in their flight two hundred found, 
Two hundred, by Medusa's head were ston'd. 
Fierce Phineus now repents the wrongful fight, 
And views his varied friends, a dreadful sight; 
He knows their faces, for their help he sues, 
And thinks, not hearing him, that they refuse: 
By name he begs their succour, one by one, 
Then doubts their life, and feels the friendly stone. 
Struck with remorse, and conscious of his pride, 
Convict of sin, he turn'd his eyes aside; 
With suppliant mein to Perseus thus he prays, 
Hence with the head, as far as winds and seas 
Can bear thee; hence, o quit the Cephen shore, 
And never curse us with Medusa more, 
That horrid head, which stiffens into stone 
Those impious men who, daring death, look on. 
I warr'd not with thee out of hate or strife, 
My honest cause was to defend my wife, 
First pledg'd to me; what crime cou'd I suppose, 
To arm my friends, and vindicate my spouse? 
But vain, too late I see, was our design; 
Mine was the title, but the merit thine. 
Contending made me guilty, I confess; 
But penitence shou'd make that guilt the less: 
'Twas thine to conquer by Minerva's pow'r; 
Favour'd of Heav'n, thy mercy I implore; 
For life I sue; the rest to thee I yield; 
In pity, from my sight remove the shield. 

He suing said; nor durst revert his eyes 
On the grim head: and Perseus thus replies: 
Coward, what is in me to grant, I will, 
Nor blood, unworthy of my valour spill: 
Fear not to perish by my vengeful sword, 
From that secure; 'tis all the Fates afford. 
Where I now see thee, thou shalt still be seen, 
A lasting monument to please our queen; 
There still shall thy betroth'd behold her spouse, 
And find his image in her father's house. 
This said; where Phineus turn'd to shun the shield 
Full in his face the staring head he held; 
As here and there he strove to turn aside, 
The wonder wrought, the man was petrify'd: 
All marble was his frame, his humid eyes 
Drop'd tears, which hung upon the stone like ice. 
In suppliant posture, with uplifted hands, 
And fearful look, the guilty statue stands. 

Hence Perseus to his native city hies, 
Victorious, and rewarded with his prize. 
Conquest, o'er Praetus the usurper, won, 
He re-instates his grandsire in the throne. 
Praetus, his brother dispossess'd by might, 
His realm enjoy'd, and still detain'd his right: 
But Perseus pull'd the haughty tyrant down, 
And to the rightful king restor'd the throne. 
Weak was th' usurper, as his cause was wrong; 
Where Gorgon's head appears, what arms are strong? 
When Perseus to his host the monster held, 
They soon were statues, and their king expell'd. 

Thence, to Seriphus with the head he sails, 
Whose prince his story treats as idle tales: 
Lord of a little isle, he scorns to seem 
Too credulous, but laughs at that, and him. 
Yet did he not so much suspect the truth, 
As out of pride, or envy, hate the youth. 
The Argive prince, at his contempt enrag'd, 
To force his faith by fatal proof engag'd. 
Friends, shut your eyes, he cries; his shield he takes, 
And to the king expos'd Medusa's snakes. 
The monarch felt the pow'r he wou'd not own, 
And stood convict of folly in the stone. 

Thus far Minerva was content to rove 
With Perseus, offspring of her father Jove: 
Now, hid in clouds, Seriphus she forsook; 
And to the Theban tow'rs her journey took. 
Cythnos and Gyaros lying to the right, 
She pass'd unheeded in her eager flight; 
And chusing first on Helicon to rest, 
The virgin Muses in these words address'd: 

Me, the strange tidings of a new-found spring, 
Ye learned sisters, to this mountain bring. 
If all be true that Fame's wide rumours tell, 
'Twas Pegasus discover'd first your well; 
Whose piercing hoof gave the soft earth a blow, 
Which broke the surface where these waters flow. 
I saw that horse by miracle obtain 
Life, from the blood of dire Medusa slain; 
And now, this equal prodigy to view, 
From distant isles to fam'd Boeotia flew. 

The Muse Urania said, Whatever cause 
So great a Goddess to this mansion draws; 
Our shades are happy with so bright a guest, 
You, Queen, are welcome, and we Muses blest. 
What Fame has publish'd of our spring is true, 
Thanks for our spring to Pegasus are due. 
Then, with becoming courtesy, she led 
The curious stranger to their fountain's head; 
Who long survey'd, with wonder, and delight, 
Their sacred water, charming to the sight; 
Their ancient groves, dark grottos, shady bow'rs, 
And smiling plains adorn'd with various flow'rs. 
O happy Muses! she with rapture cry'd, 
Who, safe from cares, on this fair hill reside; 
Blest in your seat, and free your selves to please 
With joys of study, and with glorious ease. 

Then one replies: O Goddess, fit to guide 
Our humble works, and in our choir preside, 
Who sure wou'd wisely to these fields repair, 
To taste our pleasures, and our labours share, 
Were not your virtue, and superior mind 
To higher arts, and nobler deeds inclin'd; 
Justly you praise our works, and pleasing seat, 
Which all might envy in this soft retreat, 
Were we secur'd from dangers, and from harms; 
But maids are frighten'd with the least alarms, 
And none are safe in this licentious time; 
Still fierce Pyreneus, and his daring crime, 
With lasting horror strikes my feeble sight, 
Nor is my mind recover'd from the fright. 
With Thracian arms this bold usurper gain'd 
Daulis, and Phocis, where he proudly reign'd: 
It happen'd once, as thro' his lands we went, 
For the bright temple of Parnassus bent, 
He met us there, and in his artful mind 
Hiding the faithless action he design'd, 
Confer'd on us (whom, oh! too well he knew) 
All honours that to Goddesses are due. 
Stop, stop, ye Muses, 'tis your friend who calls, 
The tyrant said; behold the rain that falls 
On ev'ry side, and that ill-boding sky, 
Whose lowring face portends more storms are nigh. 
Pray make my house your own, and void of fear, 
While this bad weather lasts, take shelter here. 
Gods have made meaner places their resort, 
And, for a cottage, left their shining court. 

Oblig'd to stop, by the united force 
Of pouring rains, and complaisant discourse, 
His courteous invitation we obey, 
And in his hall resolve a-while to stay. 
Soon it clear'd up; the clouds began to fly, 
The driving north refin'd the show'ry sky; 
Then to pursue our journey we began: 
But the false traitor to his portal ran, 
Stopt our escape, the door securely barr'd, 
And to our honour, violence prepar'd. 
But we, transform'd to birds, avoid his snare, 
On pinions rising in the yielding air. 

But he, by lust and indignation fir'd, 
Up to his highest tow'r with speed retir'd, 
And cries, In vain you from my arms withdrew, 
The way you go your lover will pursue. 
Then, in a flying posture wildly plac'd, 
And daring from that height himself to cast, 
The wretch fell headlong, and the ground bestrew'd 
With broken bones, and stains of guilty blood. 

The Muse yet spoke; when they began to hear 
A noise of wings that flutter'd in the air; 
And strait a voice, from some high-spreading bough, 
Seem'd to salute the company below. 
The Goddess wonder'd, and inquir'd from whence 
That tongue was heard, that spoke so plainly sense 
(It seem'd to her a human voice to be, 
But prov'd a bird's; for in a shady tree 
Nine magpies perch'd lament their alter'd state, 
And, what they hear, are skilful to repeat). 

The sister to the wondring Goddess said, 
These, foil'd by us, by us were thus repaid. 
These did Evippe of Paeonia bring 
With nine hard labour-pangs to Pella's king. 
The foolish virgins of their number proud, 
And puff'd with praises of the senseless crowd, 
Thro' all Achaia, and th' Aemonian plains 
Defy'd us thus, to match their artless strains; 
No more, ye Thespian girls, your notes repeat, 
Nor with false harmony the vulgar cheat; 
In voice or skill, if you with us will vye, 
As many we, in voice or skill will try. 
Surrender you to us, if we excell, 
Fam'd Aganippe, and Medusa's well. 
The conquest yours, your prize from us shall be 
The Aemathian plains to snowy Paeone; 
The nymphs our judges. To dispute the field, 
We thought a shame; but greater shame to yield. 
On seats of living stone the sisters sit, 
And by the rivers swear to judge aright. 

Then rises one of the presumptuous throng, 
Steps rudely forth, and first begins the song; 
With vain address describes the giants' wars, 
And to the Gods their fabled acts prefers. 
She sings, from Earth's dark womb how Typhon rose, 
And struck with mortal fear his heav'nly foes. 
How the Gods fled to Egypt's slimy soil, 
And hid their heads beneath the banks of Nile: 
How Typhon, from the conquer'd skies, pursu'd 
Their routed godheads to the sev'n-mouth'd flood; 
Forc'd every God, his fury to escape, 
Some beastly form to take, or earthly shape. 
Jove (so she sung) was chang'd into a ram, 
From whence the horns of Libyan Ammon came. 
Bacchus a goat, Apollo was a crow, 
Phaebe a cat; die wife of Jove a cow, 
Whose hue was whiter than the falling snow. 
Mercury to a nasty Ibis turn'd, 
The change obscene, afraid of Typhon, mourn'd; 
While Venus from a fish protection craves, 
And once more plunges in her native waves. 

She sung, and to her harp her voice apply'd; 
Then us again to match her they defy'd. 
But our poor song, perhaps, for you to hear, 
Nor leisure serves, nor is it worth your ear. 
That causeless doubt remove, O Muse rehearse, 
The Goddess cry'd, your ever-grateful verse. 
Beneath a chequer'd shade she takes her seat, 
And bids the sister her whole song repeat. 
The sister thus: Calliope we chose 
For the performance. The sweet virgin rose, 
With ivy crown'd she tunes her golden strings, 
And to her harp this composition sings. 

First Ceres taught the lab'ring hind to plow 
The pregnant Earth, and quickning seed to sow. 
She first for Man did wholsome food provide, 
And with just laws the wicked world supply'd: 
All good from her deriv'd, to her belong 
The grateful tributes of the Muse's song. 
Her more than worthy of our verse we deem, 
Oh! were our verse more worthy of the theme. 

Jove on the giant fair Trinacria hurl'd, 
And with one bolt reveng'd his starry world. 
Beneath her burning hills Tiphaeus lies, 
And, strugling always, strives in vain to rise. 
Down does Pelorus his right hand suppress 
Tow'rd Latium, on the left Pachyne weighs. 
His legs are under Lilybaeum spread, 
And Aetna presses hard his horrid head. 
On his broad back he there extended lies, 
And vomits clouds of ashes to the skies. 
Oft lab'ring with his load, at last he tires, 
And spews out in revenge a flood of fires. 
Mountains he struggles to o'erwhelm, and towns; 
Earth's inmost bowels quake, and Nature groans. 
His terrors reach the direful king of Hell; 
He fears his throws will to the day reveal 
The realms of night, and fright his trembling ghosts. 

This to prevent, he quits the Stygian coasts, 
In his black carr, by sooty horses drawn, 
Fair Sicily he seeks, and dreads the dawn. 
Around her plains he casts his eager eyes, 
And ev'ry mountain to the bottom tries. 
But when, in all the careful search, he saw 
No cause of fear, no ill-suspected flaw; 
Secure from harm, and wand'ring on at will, 
Venus beheld him from her flow'ry hill: 
When strait the dame her little Cupid prest 
With secret rapture to her snowy breast, 
And in these words the flutt'ring boy addrest. 

O thou, my arms, my glory, and my pow'r, 
My son, whom men, and deathless Gods adore; 
Bend thy sure bow, whose arrows never miss'd, 
No longer let Hell's king thy sway resist; 
Take him, while stragling from his dark abodes 
He coasts the kingdoms of superior Gods. 
If sovereign Jove, if Gods who rule the waves, 
And Neptune, who rules them, have been thy slaves; 
Shall Hell be free? The tyrant strike, my son, 
Enlarge thy mother's empire, and thy own. 
Let not our Heav'n be made the mock of Hell, 
But Pluto to confess thy pow'r compel. 
Our rule is slighted in our native skies, 
See Pallas, see Diana too defies 
Thy darts, which Ceres' daughter wou'd despise. 
She too our empire treats with aukward scorn; 
Such insolence no longer's to be born. 
Revenge our slighted reign, and with thy dart 
Transfix the virgin's to the uncle's heart. 

She said; and from his quiver strait he drew 
A dart that surely wou'd the business do. 
She guides his hand, she makes her touch the test, 
And of a thousand arrows chose the best: 
No feather better pois'd, a sharper head 
None had, and sooner none, and surer sped. 
He bends his bow, he draws it to his ear, 
Thro' Pluto's heart it drives, and fixes there. 

Near Enna's walls a spacious lake is spread, 
Fam'd for the sweetly-singing swans it bred; 
Pergusa is its name: and never more 
Were heard, or sweeter on Cayster's shore. 
Woods crown the lake; and Phoebus ne'er invades 
The tufted fences, or offends the shades: 
Fresh fragrant breezes fan the verdant bow'rs, 
And the moist ground smiles with enamel'd flow'rs 
The chearful birds their airy carols sing, 
And the whole year is one eternal spring. 

Here, while young Proserpine, among the maids, 
Diverts herself in these delicious shades; 
While like a child with busy speed and care 
She gathers lillies here, and vi'lets there; 
While first to fill her little lap she strives, 
Hell's grizly monarch at the shade arrives; 
Sees her thus sporting on the flow'ry green, 
And loves the blooming maid, as soon as seen. 
His urgent flame impatient of delay, 
Swift as his thought he seiz'd the beauteous prey, 
And bore her in his sooty carr away. 
The frighted Goddess to her mother cries, 
But all in vain, for now far off she flies; 
Far she behind her leaves her virgin train; 
To them too cries, and cries to them in vain, 
And, while with passion she repeats her call, 
The vi'lets from her lap, and lillies fall: 
She misses 'em, poor heart! and makes new moan; 
Her lillies, ah! are lost, her vi'lets gone. 

O'er hills, the ravisher, and vallies speeds, 
By name encouraging his foamy steeds; 
He rattles o'er their necks the rusty reins, 
And ruffles with the stroke their shaggy manes. 
O'er lakes he whirls his flying wheels, and comes 
To the Palici breathing sulph'rous fumes. 
And thence to where the Bacchiads of renown 
Between unequal havens built their town; 
Where Arethusa, round th' imprison'd sea, 
Extends her crooked coast to Cyane; 
The nymph who gave the neighb'ring lake a name, 
Of all Sicilian nymphs the first in fame, 
She from the waves advanc'd her beauteous head, 
The Goddess knew, and thus to Pluto said: 
Farther thou shalt not with the virgin run; 
Ceres unwilling, canst thou be her son? 
The maid shou'd be by sweet perswasion won. 
Force suits not with the softness of the fair; 
For, if great things with small I may compare, 
Me Anapis once lov'd; a milder course 
He took, and won me by his words, not force. 

Then, stretching out her arms, she stopt his way; 
But he, impatient of the shortest stay, 
Throws to his dreadful steeds the slacken'd rein, 
And strikes his iron sceptre thro' the main; 
The depths profound thro' yielding waves he cleaves, 
And to Hell's center a free passage leaves; 
Down sinks his chariot, and his realms of night 
The God soon reaches with a rapid flight. 

But still does Cyane the rape bemoan, 
And with the Goddess' wrongs laments her own; 
For the stoln maid, and for her injur'd spring, 
Time to her trouble no relief can bring. 
In her sad heart a heavy load she bears, 
'Till the dumb sorrow turns her all to tears. 
Her mingling waters with that fountain pass, 
Of which she late immortal Goddess was; 
Her varied members to a fluid melt, 
A pliant softness in her bones is felt; 
Her wavy locks first drop away in dew, 
And liquid next her slender fingers grew. 
The body's change soon seizes its extreme, 
Her legs dissolve, and feet flow off in stream. 
Her arms, her back, her shoulders, and her side, 
Her swelling breasts in little currents glide, 
A silver liquor only now remains 
Within the channel of her purple veins; 
Nothing to fill love's grasp; her husband chaste 
Bathes in that bosom he before embrac'd. 

Thus, while thro' all the Earth, and all the main, 
Her daughter mournful Ceres sought in vain; 
Aurora, when with dewy looks she rose, 
Nor burnish'd Vesper found her in repose, 
At Aetna's flaming mouth two pitchy pines 
To light her in her search at length she tines. 
Restless, with these, thro' frosty night she goes, 
Nor fears the cutting winds, nor heeds the snows; 
And, when the morning-star the day renews, 
From east to west her absent child pursues. 

Thirsty at last by long fatigue she grows, 
But meets no spring, no riv'let near her flows. 
Then looking round, a lowly cottage spies, 
Smoaking among the trees, and thither hies. 
The Goddess knocking at the little door, 
'Twas open'd by a woman old and poor, 
Who, when she begg'd for water, gave her ale 
Brew'd long, but well preserv'd from being stale. 
The Goddess drank; a chuffy lad was by, 
Who saw the liquor with a grutching eye, 
And grinning cries, She's greedy more than dry. 

Ceres, offended at his foul grimace, 
Flung what she had not drunk into his face, 
The sprinklings speckle where they hit the skin, 
And a long tail does from his body spin; 
His arms are turn'd to legs, and lest his size 
Shou'd make him mischievous, and he might rise 
Against mankind, diminutives his frame, 
Less than a lizzard, but in shape the same. 
Amaz'd the dame the wondrous sight beheld, 
And weeps, and fain wou'd touch her quondam child. 
Yet her approach th' affrighted vermin shuns, 
And fast into the greatest crevice runs. 
A name they gave him, which the spots exprest, 
That rose like stars, and varied all his breast. 

What lands, what seas the Goddess wander'd o'er, 
Were long to tell; for there remain'd no more. 
Searching all round, her fruitless toil she mourns, 
And with regret to Sicily returns. 
At length, where Cyane now flows, she came, 
Who cou'd have told her, were she still the same 
As when she saw her daughter sink to Hell; 
But what she knows she wants a tongue to tell. 
Yet this plain signal manifestly gave, 
The virgin's girdle floating on a wave, 
As late she dropt it from her slender waste, 
When with her uncle thro' the deep she past. 
Ceres the token by her grief confest, 
And tore her golden hair, and beat her breast. 
She knows not on what land her curse shou'd fall, 
But, as ingrate, alike upbraids them all, 
Unworthy of her gifts; Trinacria most, 
Where the last steps she found of what she lost. 
The plough for this the vengeful Goddess broke, 
And with one death the ox, and owner struck, 
In vain the fallow fields the peasant tills, 
The seed, corrupted ere 'tis sown, she kills. 
The fruitful soil, that once such harvests bore, 
Now mocks the farmer's care, and teems no more. 
And the rich grain which fills the furrow'd glade, 
Rots in the seed, or shrivels in the blade; 
Or too much sun burns up, or too much rain 
Drowns, or black blights destroy the blasted plain; 
Or greedy birds the new-sown seed devour, 
Or darnel, thistles, and a crop impure 
Of knotted grass along the acres stand, 
And spread their thriving roots thro' all the land. 

Then from the waves soft Arethusa rears 
Her head, and back she flings her dropping hairs. 
O mother of the maid, whom thou so far 
Hast sought, of whom thou canst no tidings hear; 
O thou, she cry'd, who art to life a friend, 
Cease here thy search, and let thy labour end. 
Thy faithful Sicily's a guiltless clime, 
And shou'd not suffer for another's crime; 
She neither knew, nor cou'd prevent the deed; 
Nor think that for my country thus I plead; 
My country's Pisa, I'm an alien here, 
Yet these abodes to Elis I prefer, 
No clime to me so sweet, no place so dear. 
These springs I Arethusa now possess, 
And this my seat, o gracious Goddess, bless: 
This island why I love, and why I crost 
Such spacious seas to reach Ortygia's coast, 
To you I shall impart, when, void of care, 
Your heart's at ease, and you're more fit to hear; 
When on your brow no pressing sorrow sits, 
For gay content alone such tales admits. 
When thro' Earth's caverns I a-while have roul'd 
My waves, I rise, and here again behold 
The long-lost stars; and, as I late did glide 
Near Styx, Proserpina there I espy'd. 
Fear still with grief might in her face be seen; 
She still her rape laments; yet, made a queen, 
Beneath those gloomy shades her sceptre sways, 
And ev'n th' infernal king her will obeys. 

This heard, the Goddess like a statue stood, 
Stupid with grief; and in that musing mood 
Continu'd long; new cares a-while supprest 
The reigning of her immortal breast. 
At last to Jove her daughter's sire she flies, 
And with her chariot cuts the chrystal skies; 
She comes in clouds, and with dishevel'd hair, 
Standing before his throne, prefers her pray'r. 

King of the Gods, defend my blood and thine, 
And use it not the worse for being mine. 
If I no more am gracious in thy sight, 
Be just, o Jove, and do thy daughter right. 
In vain I sought her the wide world around, 
And, when I most despair'd to find her, found. 
But how can I the fatal finding boast, 
By which I know she is for ever lost? 
Without her father's aid, what other Pow'r 
Can to my arms the ravish'd maid restore? 
Let him restore her, I'll the crime forgive; 
My child, tho' ravish'd, I'd with joy receive. 
Pity, your daughter with a thief shou'd wed, 
Tho' mine, you think, deserves no better bed. 

Jove thus replies: It equally belongs 
To both, to guard our common pledge from wrongs. 
But if to things we proper names apply, 
This hardly can be call'd an injury. 
The theft is love; nor need we blush to own 
The thief, if I can judge, to be our son. 
Had you of his desert no other proof, 
To be Jove's brother is methinks enough. 
Nor was my throne by worth superior got, 
Heav'n fell to me, as Hell to him, by lot: 
If you are still resolv'd her loss to mourn, 
And nothing less will serve than her return; 
Upon these terms she may again be yours 
(Th' irrevocable terms of fate, not ours), 
Of Stygian food if she did never taste, 
Hell's bounds may then, and only then, be past. 

The Goddess now, resolving to succeed, 
Down to the gloomy shades descends with speed; 
But adverse fate had otherwise decreed. 
For, long before, her giddy thoughtless child 
Had broke her fast, and all her projects spoil'd. 
As in the garden's shady walk she stray'd, 
A fair pomegranate charm'd the simple maid, 
Hung in her way, and tempting her to taste, 
She pluck'd the fruit, and took a short repast. 
Seven times, a seed at once, she eat the food; 
The fact Ascalaphus had only view'd; 
Whom Acheron begot in Stygian shades 
On Orphne, fam'd among Avernal maids; 
He saw what past, and by discov'ring all, 
Detain'd the ravish'd nymph in cruel thrall. 

But now a queen, she with resentment heard, 
And chang'd the vile informer to a bird. 
In Phlegeton's black stream her hand she dips, 
Sprinkles his head, and wets his babling lips. 
Soon on his face, bedropt with magick dew, 
A change appear'd, and gawdy feathers grew. 
A crooked beak the place of nose supplies, 
Rounder his head, and larger are his eyes. 
His arms and body waste, but are supply'd 
With yellow pinions flagging on each side. 
His nails grow crooked, and are turn'd to claws, 
And lazily along his heavy wings he draws. 
Ill-omen'd in his form, the unlucky fowl, 
Abhorr'd by men, and call'd a scrieching owl. 

Justly this punishment was due to him, 
And less had been too little for his crime; 
But, o ye nymphs that from the flood descend, 
What fault of yours the Gods cou'd so offend, 
With wings and claws your beauteous forms to spoil, 
Yet save your maiden face, and winning smile? 
Were you not with her in Pergusa's bow'rs, 
When Proserpine went forth to gather flow'rs? 
Since Pluto in his carr the Goddess caught, 
Have you not for her in each climate sought? 
And when on land you long had search'd in vain, 
You wish'd for wings to cross the pathless main; 
That Earth and Sea might witness to your care: 
The Gods were easy, and return'd your pray'r; 
With golden wing o'er foamy waves you fled, 
And to the sun your plumy glories spread. 
But, lest the soft enchantment of your songs, 
And the sweet musick of your flat'ring tongues 
Shou'd quite be lost (as courteous fates ordain), 
Your voice and virgin beauty still remain. 

Jove some amends for Ceres lost to make, 
Yet willing Pluto shou'd the joy partake, 
Gives 'em of Proserpine an equal share, 
Who, claim'd by both, with both divides the year. 
The Goddess now in either empire sways, 
Six moons in Hell, and six with Ceres stays. 
Her peevish temper's chang'd; that sullen mind, 
Which made ev'n Hell uneasy, now is kind, 
Her voice refines, her mein more sweet appears, 
Her forehead free from frowns, her eyes from tears, 
As when, with golden light, the conqu'ring day 
Thro' dusky exhalations clears a way. 
Ceres her daughter's rape no longer mourn'd, 
But back to Arethusa's spring return'd; 
And sitting on the margin, bid her tell 
From whence she came, and why a sacred well. 

Still were the purling waters, and the maid 
From the smooth surface rais'd her beauteous head, 
Wipes off the drops that from her tresses ran, 
And thus to tell Alpheus' loves began. 

In Elis first I breath'd the living air, 
The chase was all my pleasure, all my care. 
None lov'd like me the forest to explore, 
To pitch the toils, and drive the bristled boar. 
Of fair, tho' masculine, I had the name, 
But gladly wou'd to that have quitted claim: 
It less my pride than indignation rais'd, 
To hear the beauty I neglected, prais'd; 
Such compliments I loath'd, such charms as these 
I scorn'd, and thought it infamy to please. 

Once, I remember, in the summer's heat, 
Tir'd with the chase, I sought a cool retreat; 
And, walking on, a silent current found, 
Which gently glided o'er the grav'ly ground. 
The chrystal water was so smooth, so clear, 
My eye distinguish'd ev'ry pebble there. 
So soft its motion, that I scarce perceiv'd 
The running stream, or what I saw believ'd. 
The hoary willow, and the poplar, made 
Along the shelving bank a grateful shade. 
In the cool rivulet my feet I dipt, 
Then waded to the knee, and then I stript; 
My robe I careless on an osier threw, 
That near the place commodiously grew; 
Nor long upon the border naked stood, 
But plung'd with speed into the silver flood. 
My arms a thousand ways I mov'd, and try'd 
To quicken, if I cou'd, the lazy tide; 
Where, while I play'd my swimming gambols o'er, 
I heard a murm'ring voice, and frighted sprung to shore.

Oh! whither, Arethusa, dost thou fly? 
From the brook's bottom did Alpheus cry; 
Again, I heard him, in a hollow tone, 
Oh! whither, Arethusa, dost thou run? 
Naked I flew, nor cou'd I stay to hide 
My limbs, my robe was on the other side; 
Alpheus follow'd fast, th' inflaming sight 
Quicken'd his speed, and made his labour light; 
He sees me ready for his eager arms, 
And with a greedy glance devours my charms. 
As trembling doves from pressing danger fly, 
When the fierce hawk comes sousing from the sky; 
And, as fierce hawks the trembling doves pursue, 
From him I fled, and after me he flew. 
First by Orchomenus I took my flight, 
And soon had Psophis and Cyllene in sight; 
Behind me then high Maenalus I lost, 
And craggy Erimanthus scal'd with frost; 
Elis was next; thus far the ground I trod 
With nimble feet, before the distanc'd God. 
But here I lagg'd, unable to sustain 
The labour longer, and my flight maintain; 
While he more strong, more patient of the toil, 
And fir'd with hopes of beauty's speedy spoil, 
Gain'd my lost ground, and by redoubled pace, 
Now left between us but a narrow space. 
Unweary'd I 'till now o'er hills, and plains, 
O'er rocks, and rivers ran, and felt no pains: 
The sun behind me, and the God I kept, 
But, when I fastest shou'd have run, I stept. 
Before my feet his shadow now appear'd; 
As what I saw, or rather what I fear'd. 
Yet there I could not be deceiv'd by fear, 
Who felt his breath pant on my braided hair, 
And heard his sounding tread, and knew him to be near. 
Tir'd, and despairing, O celestial maid, 
I'm caught, I cry'd, without thy heav'nly aid. 
Help me, Diana, help a nymph forlorn, 
Devoted to the woods, who long has worn 
Thy livery, and long thy quiver born. 
The Goddess heard; my pious pray'r prevail'd; 
In muffling clouds my virgin head was veil'd, 
The am'rous God, deluded of his hopes, 
Searches the gloom, and thro' the darkness gropes; 
Twice, where Diana did her servant hide 
He came, and twice, O Arethusa! cry'd. 
How shaken was my soul, how sunk my heart! 
The terror seiz'd on ev'ry trembling part. 
Thus when the wolf about the mountain prowls 
For prey, the lambkin hears his horrid howls: 
The tim'rous hare, the pack approaching nigh, 
Thus hearkens to the hounds, and trembles at the cry; 
Nor dares she stir, for fear her scented breath 
Direct the dogs, and guide the threaten'd death. 
Alpheus in the cloud no traces found 
To mark my way, yet stays to guard the ground, 
The God so near, a chilly sweat possest 
My fainting limbs, at ev'ry pore exprest; 
My strength distill'd in drops, my hair in dew, 
My form was chang'd, and all my substance new. 
Each motion was a stream, and my whole frame 
Turn'd to a fount, which still preserves my name. 
Resolv'd I shou'd not his embrace escape, 
Again the God resumes his fluid shape; 
To mix his streams with mine he fondly tries, 
But still Diana his attempt denies. 
She cleaves the ground; thro' caverns dark I run 
A diff'rent current, while he keeps his own. 
To dear Ortygia she conducts my way, 
And here I first review the welcome day. 

Here Arethusa stopt; then Ceres takes 
Her golden carr, and yokes her fiery snakes; 
With a just rein, along mid-heaven she flies 
O'er Earth, and seas, and cuts the yielding skies. 
She halts at Athens, dropping like a star, 
And to Triptolemus resigns her carr. 
Parent of seed, she gave him fruitful grain, 
And bad him teach to till and plough the plain; 
The seed to sow, as well in fallow fields, 
As where the soil manur'd a richer harvest yields. 

The youth o'er Europe and o'er Asia drives, 
'Till at the court of Lyncus he arrives. 
The tyrant Scythia's barb'rous empire sway'd; 
And, when he saw Triptolemus, he said, 
How cam'st thou, stranger, to our court, and why? 
Thy country, and thy name? The youth did thus reply: 
Triptolemus my name; my country's known 
O'er all the world, Minerva's fav'rite town, 
Athens, the first of cities in renown. 
By land I neither walk'd, nor sail'd by sea, 
But hither thro' the Aether made my way. 
By me, the Goddess who the fields befriends, 
These gifts, the greatest of all blessings, sends. 
The grain she gives if in your soil you sow, 
Thence wholsom food in golden crops shall grow. 

Soon as the secret to the king was known, 
He grudg'd the glory of the service done, 
And wickedly resolv'd to make it all his own. 
To hide his purpose, he invites his guest, 
The friend of Ceres, to a royal feast, 
And when sweet sleep his heavy eyes had seiz'd, 
The tyrant with his steel attempts his breast. 
Him strait a lynx's shape the Goddess gives, 
And home the youth her sacred dragons drives. 

The chosen Muse here ends her sacred lays; 
The nymphs unanimous decree the bays, 
And give the Heliconian Goddesses the praise. 
Then, far from vain that we shou'd thus prevail, 
But much provok'd to hear the vanquish'd rail, 
Calliope resumes: Too long we've born 
Your daring taunts, and your affronting scorn; 
Your challenge justly merited a curse, 
And this unmanner'd railing makes it worse. 
Since you refuse us calmly to enjoy 
Our patience, next our passions we'll employ; 
The dictates of a mind enrag'd pursue, 
And, what our just resentment bids us, do. 

The railers laugh, our threats and wrath despise, 
And clap their hands, and make a scolding noise: 
But in the fact they're seiz'd; beneath their nails 
Feathers they feel, and on their faces scales; 
Their horny beaks at once each other scare, 
Their arms are plum'd, and on their backs they bear 
Py'd wings, and flutter in the fleeting air. 
Chatt'ring, the scandal of the woods they fly, 
And there continue still their clam'rous cry: 
The same their eloquence, as maids, or birds, 
Now only noise, and nothing then but words. 

Pallas, attending to the Muse's song, 
Approv'd the just resentment of their wrong; 
And thus reflects: While tamely I commend 
Those who their injur'd deities defend, 
My own divinity affronted stands, 
And calls aloud for justice at my hands; 
Then takes the hint, asham'd to lag behind, 
And on Arachne' bends her vengeful mind; 
One at the loom so excellently skill'd, 
That to the Goddess she refus'd to yield. 
Low was her birth, and small her native town, 
She from her art alone obtain'd renown. 
Idmon, her father, made it his employ, 
To give the spungy fleece a purple dye: 
Of vulgar strain her mother, lately dead, 
With her own rank had been content to wed; 
Yet she their daughter, tho' her time was spent 
In a small hamlet, and of mean descent, 
Thro' the great towns of Lydia gain'd a name, 
And fill'd the neighb'ring countries with her fame. 

Oft, to admire the niceness of her skill, 
The Nymphs would quit their fountain, shade, or hill: 
Thither, from green Tymolus, they repair, 
And leave the vineyards, their peculiar care; 
Thither, from fam'd Pactolus' golden stream, 
Drawn by her art, the curious Naiads came. 
Nor would the work, when finish'd, please so much, 
As, while she wrought, to view each graceful touch; 
Whether the shapeless wool in balls she wound, 
Or with quick motion turn'd the spindle round, 
Or with her pencil drew the neat design, 
Pallas her mistress shone in every line. 
This the proud maid with scornful air denies, 
And ev'n the Goddess at her work defies; 
Disowns her heav'nly mistress ev'ry hour, 
Nor asks her aid, nor deprecates her pow'r. 
Let us, she cries, but to a tryal come, 
And, if she conquers, let her fix my doom. 

The Goddess then a beldame's form put on, 
With silver hairs her hoary temples shone; 
Prop'd by a staff, she hobbles in her walk, 
And tott'ring thus begins her old wives' talk. 

Young maid attend, nor stubbornly despise 
The admonitions of the old, and wise; 
For age, tho' scorn'd, a ripe experience bears, 
That golden fruit, unknown to blooming years: 
Still may remotest fame your labours crown, 
And mortals your superior genius own; 
But to the Goddess yield, and humbly meek 
A pardon for your bold presumption seek; 
The Goddess will forgive. At this the maid, 
With passion fir'd, her gliding shuttle stay'd; 
And, darting vengeance with an angry look, 
To Pallas in disguise thus fiercely spoke. 

Thou doating thing, whose idle babling tongue 
But too well shews the plague of living long; 
Hence, and reprove, with this your sage advice, 
Your giddy daughter, or your aukward neice; 
Know, I despise your counsel, and am still 
A woman, ever wedded to my will; 
And, if your skilful Goddess better knows, 
Let her accept the tryal I propose. 

She does, impatient Pallas strait replies, 
And, cloath'd with heavenly light, sprung from her odd disguise.

The Nymphs, and virgins of the plain adore 
The awful Goddess, and confess her pow'r; 
The maid alone stood unappall'd; yet show'd 
A transient blush, that for a moment glow'd, 
Then disappear'd; as purple streaks adorn 
The opening beauties of the rosy morn; 
Till Phoebus rising prevalently bright, 
Allays the tincture with his silver light. 
Yet she persists, and obstinately great, 
In hopes of conquest hurries on her fate. 
The Goddess now the challenge waves no more, 
Nor, kindly good, advises as before. 
Strait to their posts appointed both repair, 
And fix their threaded looms with equal care: 
Around the solid beam the web is ty'd, 
While hollow canes the parting warp divide; 
Thro' which with nimble flight the shuttles play, 
And for the woof prepare a ready way; 
The woof and warp unite, press'd by the toothy slay. 

Thus both, their mantles button'd to their breast, 
Their skilful fingers ply with willing haste, 
And work with pleasure; while they chear the eye 
With glowing purple of the Tyrian dye: 
Or, justly intermixing shades with light, 
Their colourings insensibly unite. 
As when a show'r transpierc'd with sunny rays, 
Its mighty arch along the heav'n displays; 
From whence a thousand diff'rent colours rise, 
Whose fine transition cheats the clearest eyes; 
So like the intermingled shading seems, 
And only differs in the last extreams. 
Then threads of gold both artfully dispose, 
And, as each part in just proportion rose, 
Some antique fable in their work disclose. 

Pallas in figures wrought the heav'nly Pow'rs, 
And Mars's hill among th' Athenian tow'rs. 
On lofty thrones twice six celestials sate, 
Jove in the midst, and held their warm debate; 
The subject weighty, and well-known to fame, 
From whom the city shou'd receive its name. 
Each God by proper features was exprest, 
Jove with majestick mein excell'd the rest. 
His three-fork'd mace the dewy sea-God shook, 
And, looking sternly, smote the ragged rock; 
When from the stone leapt forth a spritely steed, 
And Neptune claims the city for the deed. 

Herself she blazons, with a glitt'ring spear, 
And crested helm that veil'd her braided hair, 
With shield, and scaly breast-plate, implements of war. 
Struck with her pointed launce, the teeming Earth 
Seem'd to produce a new surprizing birth; 
When, from the glebe, the pledge of conquest sprung, 
A tree pale-green with fairest olives hung. 

And then, to let her giddy rival learn 
What just rewards such boldness was to earn, 
Four tryals at each corner had their part, 
Design'd in miniature, and touch'd with art. 
Haemus in one, and Rodope of Thrace 
Transform'd to mountains, fill'd the foremost place; 
Who claim'd the titles of the Gods above, 
And vainly us'd the epithets of Jove. 
Another shew'd, where the Pigmaean dame, 
Profaning Juno's venerable name, 
Turn'd to an airy crane, descends from far, 
And with her Pigmy subjects wages war. 
In a third part, the rage of Heav'n's great queen, 
Display'd on proud Antigone, was seen: 
Who with presumptuous boldness dar'd to vye, 
For beauty with the empress of the sky. 
Ah! what avails her ancient princely race, 
Her sire a king, and Troy her native place: 
Now, to a noisy stork transform'd, she flies, 
And with her whiten'd pinions cleaves the skies. 
And in the last remaining part was drawn 
Poor Cinyras that seem'd to weep in stone; 
Clasping the temple steps, he sadly mourn'd 
His lovely daughters, now to marble turn'd. 
With her own tree the finish'd piece is crown'd, 
And wreaths of peaceful olive all the work surround. 

Arachne drew the fam'd intrigues of Jove, 
Chang'd to a bull to gratify his love; 
How thro' the briny tide all foaming hoar, 
Lovely Europa on his back he bore. 
The sea seem'd waving, and the trembling maid 
Shrunk up her tender feet, as if afraid; 
And, looking back on the forsaken strand, 
To her companions wafts her distant hand. 
Next she design'd Asteria's fabled rape, 
When Jove assum'd a soaring eagle's shape: 
And shew'd how Leda lay supinely press'd, 
Whilst the soft snowy swan sate hov'ring o'er her breast,

How in a satyr's form the God beguil'd, 
When fair Antiope with twins he fill'd. 
Then, like Amphytrion, but a real Jove, 
In fair Alcmena's arms he cool'd his love. 
In fluid gold to Danae's heart he came, 
Aegina felt him in a lambent flame. 
He took Mnemosyne in shepherd's make, 
And for Deois was a speckled snake. 

She made thee, Neptune, like a wanton steer, 
Pacing the meads for love of Arne dear; 
Next like a stream, thy burning flame to slake, 
And like a ram, for fair Bisaltis' sake. 
Then Ceres in a steed your vigour try'd, 
Nor cou'd the mare the yellow Goddess hide. 
Next, to a fowl transform'd, you won by force 
The snake-hair'd mother of the winged horse; 
And, in a dolphin's fishy form, subdu'd 
Melantho sweet beneath the oozy flood. 

All these the maid with lively features drew, 
And open'd proper landskips to the view. 
There Phoebus, roving like a country swain, 
Attunes his jolly pipe along the plain; 
For lovely Isse's sake in shepherd's weeds, 
O'er pastures green his bleating flock he feeds, 
There Bacchus, imag'd like the clust'ring grape, 
Melting bedrops Erigone's fair lap; 
And there old Saturn, stung with youthful heat, 
Form'd like a stallion, rushes to the feat. 
Fresh flow'rs, which twists of ivy intertwine, 
Mingling a running foliage, close the neat design. 

This the bright Goddess passionately mov'd, 
With envy saw, yet inwardly approv'd. 
The scene of heav'nly guilt with haste she tore, 
Nor longer the affront with patience bore; 
A boxen shuttle in her hand she took, 
And more than once Arachne's forehead struck. 
Th' unhappy maid, impatient of the wrong, 
Down from a beam her injur'd person hung; 
When Pallas, pitying her wretched state, 
At once prevented, and pronounc'd her fate: 
Live; but depend, vile wretch, the Goddess cry'd, 
Doom'd in suspence for ever to be ty'd; 
That all your race, to utmost date of time, 
May feel the vengeance, and detest the crime. 

Then, going off, she sprinkled her with juice, 
Which leaves of baneful aconite produce. 
Touch'd with the pois'nous drug, her flowing hair 
Fell to the ground, and left her temples bare; 
Her usual features vanish'd from their place, 
Her body lessen'd all, but most her face. 
Her slender fingers, hanging on each side 
With many joynts, the use of legs supply'd: 
A spider's bag the rest, from which she gives 
A thread, and still by constant weaving lives. 

Swift thro' the Phrygian towns the rumour flies, 
And the strange news each female tongue employs: 
Niobe, who before she married knew 
The famous nymph, now found the story true; 
Yet, unreclaim'd by poor Arachne's fate, 
Vainly above the Gods assum'd a state. 
Her husband's fame, their family's descent, 
Their pow'r, and rich dominion's wide extent, 
Might well have justify'd a decent pride; 
But not on these alone the dame rely'd. 
Her lovely progeny, that far excell'd, 
The mother's heart with vain ambition swell'd: 
The happiest mother not unjustly styl'd, 
Had no conceited thoughts her tow'ring fancy fill'd. 

For once a prophetess with zeal inspir'd, 
Their slow neglect to warm devotion fir'd; 
Thro' ev'ry street of Thebes who ran possess'd, 
And thus in accents wild her charge express'd: 
Haste, haste, ye Theban matrons, and adore, 
With hallow'd rites, Latona's mighty pow'r; 
And, to the heav'nly twins that from her spring, 
With laurel crown'd, your smoaking incense bring. 
Strait the great summons ev'ry dame obey'd, 
And due submission to the Goddess paid: 
Graceful, with laurel chaplets dress'd, they came, 
And offer'd incense in the sacred flame. 

Mean-while, surrounded with a courtly guard, 
The royal Niobe in state appear'd; 
Attir'd in robes embroider'd o'er with gold, 
And mad with rage, yet lovely to behold: 
Her comely tresses, trembling as she stood, 
Down her fine neck with easy motion flow'd; 
Then, darting round a proud disdainful look, 
In haughty tone her hasty passion broke, 
And thus began: What madness this, to court 
A Goddess, founded meerly on report? 
Dare ye a poor pretended Pow'r invoke, 
While yet no altars to my godhead smoke? 
Mine, whose immediate lineage stands confess'd 
From Tantalus, the only mortal guest 
That e'er the Gods admitted to their feast. 
A sister of the Pleiads gave me birth; 
And Atlas, mightiest mountain upon Earth, 
Who bears the globe of all the stars above, 
My grandsire was, and Atlas sprung from Jove. 
The Theban towns my majesty adore, 
And neighb'ring Phrygia trembles at my pow'r: 
Rais'd by my husband's lute, with turrets crown'd, 
Our lofty city stands secur'd around. 
Within my court, where-e'er I turn my eyes, 
Unbounded treasures to my prospect rise: 
With these my face I modestly may name, 
As not unworthy of so high a claim; 
Seven are my daughters, of a form divine, 
With seven fair sons, an indefective line. 
Go, fools! consider this; and ask the cause 
From which my pride its strong presumption draws; 
Consider this; and then prefer to me 
Caeus the Titan's vagrant progeny; 
To whom, in travel, the whole spacious Earth 
No room afforded for her spurious birth. 
Not the least part in Earth, in Heav'n, or seas, 
Would grant your out-law'd Goddess any ease: 
'Till pitying hers, from his own wand'ring case, 
Delos, the floating island, gave a place. 
There she a mother was, of two at most; 
Only the seventh part of what I boast. 
My joys all are beyond suspicion fix'd; 
With no pollutions of misfortune mix'd; 
Safe on the Basis of my pow'r I stand, 
Above the reach of Fortune's fickle hand. 
Lessen she may my inexhausted store, 
And much destroy, yet still must leave me more. 
Suppose it possible that some may dye 
Of this my num'rous lovely progeny; 
Still with Latona I might safely vye. 
Who, by her scanty breed, scarce fit to name, 
But just escapes the childless woman's shame. 
Go then, with speed your laurel'd heads uncrown, 
And leave the silly farce you have begun. 

The tim'rous throng their sacred rites forbore, 
And from their heads the verdant laurel tore; 
Their haughty queen they with regret obey'd, 
And still in gentle murmurs softly pray'd. 

High, on the top of Cynthus' shady mount, 
With grief the Goddess saw the base affront; 
And, the abuse revolving in her breast, 
The mother her twin-offspring thus addrest. 

Lo I, my children, who with comfort knew 
Your God-like birth, and thence my glory drew; 
And thence have claim'd precedency of place 
From all but Juno of the heav'nly race, 
Must now despair, and languish in disgrace. 
My godhead question'd, and all rites divine, 
Unless you succour, banish'd from my shrine. 
Nay more, the imp of Tantalus has flung 
Reflections with her vile paternal tongue; 
Has dar'd prefer her mortal breed to mine, 
And call'd me childless; which, just fate, may she repine!

When to urge more the Goddess was prepar'd, 
Phoebus in haste replies, Too much we've heard, 
And ev'ry moment's lost, while vengeance is defer'd. 
Diana spoke the same. Then both enshroud 
Their heav'nly bodies in a sable cloud; 
And to the Theban tow'rs descending light, 
Thro' the soft yielding air direct their flight. 

Without the wall there lies a champian ground 
With even surface, far extending round, 
Beaten and level'd, while it daily feels 
The trampling horse, and chariot's grinding wheels. 
Part of proud Niobe's young rival breed, 
Practising there to ride the manag'd steed, 
Their bridles boss'd with gold, were mounted high 
On stately furniture of Tyrian dye. 
Of these, Ismenos, who by birth had been 
The first fair issue of the fruitful queen, 
Just as he drew the rein to guide his horse, 
Around the compass of the circling course, 
Sigh'd deeply, and the pangs of smart express'd, 
While the shaft stuck, engor'd within his breast: 
And, the reins dropping from his dying hand, 
He sunk quite down, and tumbled on the sand. 
Sipylus next the rattling quiver heard, 
And with full speed for his escape prepar'd; 
As when the pilot from the black'ning skies 
A gath'ring storm of wintry rain descries, 
His sails unfurl'd, and crowded all with wind, 
He strives to leave the threat'ning cloud behind: 
So fled the youth; but an unerring dart 
O'ertook him, quick discharg'd, and sped with art; 
Fix'd in his neck behind, it trembling stood, 
And at his throat display'd the point besmear'd with blood

Prone, as his posture was, he tumbled o'er, 
And bath'd his courser's mane with steaming gore. 
Next at young Phaedimus they took their aim, 
And Tantalus who bore his grandsire's name: 
These, when their other exercise was done, 
To try the wrestler's oily sport begun; 
And, straining ev'ry nerve, their skill express'd 
In closest grapple, joining breast to breast: 
When from the bending bow an arrow sent, 
Joyn'd as they were, thro' both their bodies went: 
Both groan'd, and writhing both their limbs with pain, 
They fell together bleeding on the plain; 
Then both their languid eye-balls faintly roul, 
And thus together breathe away their soul. 
With grief Alphenor saw their doleful plight, 
And smote his breast, and sicken'd at the sight; 
Then to their succour ran with eager haste, 
And, fondly griev'd, their stiff'ning limbs embrac'd; 
But in the action falls: a thrilling dart, 
By Phoebus guided, pierc'd him to the heart. 
This, as they drew it forth, his midriff tore, 
Its barbed point the fleshy fragments bore, 
And let the soul gush out in streams of purple gore. 
But Damasichthon, by a double wound, 
Beardless, and young, lay gasping on the ground. 
Fix'd in his sinewy ham, the steely point 
Stuck thro' his knee, and pierc'd the nervous joint: 
And, as he stoop'd to tug the painful dart, 
Another struck him in a vital part; 
Shot thro' his wezon, by the wing it hung. 
The life-blood forc'd it out, and darting upward sprung,

Ilioneus, the last, with terror stands, 
Lifting in pray'r his unavailing hands; 
And, ignorant from whom his griefs arise, 
Spare me, o all ye heav'nly Pow'rs, he cries: 
Phoebus was touch'd too late, the sounding bow 
Had sent the shaft, and struck the fatal blow; 
Which yet but gently gor'd his tender side, 
So by a slight and easy wound he dy'd. 

Swift to the mother's ears the rumour came, 
And doleful sighs the heavy news proclaim; 
With anger and surprize inflam'd by turns, 
In furious rage her haughty stomach burns: 
First she disputes th' effects of heav'nly pow'r, 
Then at their daring boldness wonders more; 
For poor Amphion with sore grief distrest, 
Hoping to sooth his cares by endless rest, 
Had sheath'd a dagger in his wretched breast. 
And she, who toss'd her high disdainful head, 
When thro' the streets in solemn pomp she led 
The throng that from Latona's altar fled, 
Assuming state beyond the proudest queen; 
Was now the miserablest object seen. 
Prostrate among the clay-cold dead she fell, 
And kiss'd an undistinguish'd last farewel. 
Then her pale arms advancing to the skies, 
Cruel Latona! triumph now, she cries. 
My grieving soul in bitter anguish drench, 
And with my woes your thirsty passion quench; 
Feast your black malice at a price thus dear, 
While the sore pangs of sev'n such deaths I bear. 
Triumph, too cruel rival, and display 
Your conqu'ring standard; for you've won the day. 
Yet I'll excel; for yet, tho' sev'n are slain, 
Superior still in number I remain. 
Scarce had she spoke; the bow-string's twanging sound 
Was heard, and dealt fresh terrors all around; 
Which all, but Niobe alone, confound. 
Stunn'd, and obdurate by her load of grief, 
Insensible she sits, nor hopes relief. 

Before the fun'ral biers, all weeping sad, 
Her daughters stood, in vests of sable clad, 
When one, surpriz'd, and stung with sudden smart, 
In vain attempts to draw the sticking dart: 
But to grim death her blooming youth resigns, 
And o'er her brother's corpse her dying head reclines. 
This, to asswage her mother's anguish tries, 
And, silenc'd in the pious action, dies; 
Shot by a secret arrow, wing'd with death, 
Her fault'ring lips but only gasp'd for breath. 
One, on her dying sister, breathes her last; 
Vainly in flight another's hopes are plac'd: 
This hiding, from her fate a shelter seeks; 
That trembling stands, and fills the air with shrieks. 
And all in vain; for now all six had found 
Their way to death, each by a diff'rent wound. 
The last, with eager care the mother veil'd, 
Behind her spreading mantle close conceal'd, 
And with her body guarded, as a shield. 
Only for this, this youngest, I implore, 
Grant me this one request, I ask no more; 
O grant me this! she passionately cries: 
But while she speaks, the destin'd virgin dies. 

Widow'd, and childless, lamentable state! 
A doleful sight, among the dead she sate; 
Harden'd with woes, a statue of despair, 
To ev'ry breath of wind unmov'd her hair; 
Her cheek still red'ning, but its colour dead, 
Faded her eyes, and set within her head. 
No more her pliant tongue its motion keeps, 
But stands congeal'd within her frozen lips. 
Stagnate, and dull, within her purple veins, 
Its current stop'd, the lifeless blood remains. 
Her feet their usual offices refuse, 
Her arms, and neck their graceful gestures lose: 
Action, and life from ev'ry part are gone, 
And ev'n her entrails turn to solid stone; 
Yet still she weeps, and whirl'd by stormy winds, 
Born thro' the air, her native country finds; 
There fix'd, she stands upon a bleaky hill, 
There yet her marble cheeks eternal tears distil. 

Then all, reclaim'd by this example, show'd 
A due regard for each peculiar God: 
Both men, and women their devoirs express'd, 
And great Latona's awful pow'r confess'd. 
Then, tracing instances of older time, 
To suit the nature of the present crime, 
Thus one begins his tale.- Where Lycia yields 
A golden harvest from its fertile fields, 
Some churlish peasants, in the days of yore, 
Provok'd the Goddess to exert her pow'r. 
The thing indeed the meanness of the place 
Has made obscure, surprizing as it was; 
But I my self once happen'd to behold 
This famous lake of which the story's told. 
My father then, worn out by length of days, 
Nor able to sustain the tedious ways, 
Me with a guide had sent the plains to roam, 
And drive his well-fed stragling heifers home. 
Here, as we saunter'd thro' the verdant meads, 
We spy'd a lake o'er-grown with trembling reeds, 
Whose wavy tops an op'ning scene disclose, 
From which an antique smoaky altar rose. 
I, as my susperstitious guide had done, 
Stop'd short, and bless'd my self, and then went on; 
Yet I enquir'd to whom the altar stood, 
Faunus, the Naids, or some native God? 
No silvan deity, my friend replies, 
Enshrin'd within this hallow'd altar lies. 
For this, o youth, to that fam'd Goddess stands, 
Whom, at th' imperial Juno's rough commands, 
Of ev'ry quarter of the Earth bereav'd, 
Delos, the floating isle, at length receiv'd. 
Who there, in spite of enemies, brought forth, 
Beneath an olive's shade, her great twin-birth. 

Hence too she fled the furious stepdame's pow'r, 
And in her arms a double godhead bore; 
And now the borders of fair Lycia gain'd, 
Just when the summer solstice parch'd the land. 
With thirst the Goddess languishing, no more 
Her empty'd breast would yield its milky store; 
When, from below, the smiling valley show'd 
A silver lake that in its bottom flow'd: 
A sort of clowns were reaping, near the bank, 
The bending osier, and the bullrush dank; 
The cresse, and water-lilly, fragrant weed, 
Whose juicy stalk the liquid fountains feed. 
The Goddess came, and kneeling on the brink, 
Stoop'd at the fresh repast, prepar'd to drink. 
Then thus, being hinder'd by the rabble race, 
In accents mild expostulates the case. 
Water I only ask, and sure 'tis hard 
From Nature's common rights to be debar'd: 
This, as the genial sun, and vital air, 
Should flow alike to ev'ry creature's share. 
Yet still I ask, and as a favour crave, 
That which, a publick bounty, Nature gave. 
Nor do I seek my weary limbs to drench; 
Only, with one cool draught, my thirst I'd quench. 
Now from my throat the usual moisture dries, 
And ev'n my voice in broken accents dies: 
One draught as dear as life I should esteem, 
And water, now I thirst, would nectar seem. 
Oh! let my little babes your pity move, 
And melt your hearts to charitable love; 
They (as by chance they did) extend to you 
Their little hands, and my request pursue. 

Whom would these soft perswasions not subdue, 
Tho' the most rustick, and unmanner'd crew? 
Yet they the Goddess's request refuse, 
And with rude words reproachfully abuse: 
Nay more, with spiteful feet the villains trod 
O'er the soft bottom of the marshy flood, 
And blacken'd all the lake with clouds of rising mud. 

Her thirst by indignation was suppress'd; 
Bent on revenge, the Goddess stood confess'd. 
Her suppliant hands uplifting to the skies, 
For a redress, to Heav'n she now applies. 
And, May you live, she passionately cry'd, 
Doom'd in that pool for ever to abide. 

The Goddess has her wish; for now they chuse 
To plunge, and dive among the watry ooze; 
Sometimes they shew their head above the brim, 
And on the glassy surface spread to swim; 
Often upon the bank their station take, 
Then spring, and leap into the cooly lake. 
Still, void of shame, they lead a clam'rous life, 
And, croaking, still scold on in endless strife; 
Compell'd to live beneath the liquid stream, 
Where still they quarrel, and attempt to skream. 
Now, from their bloated throat, their voice puts on 
Imperfect murmurs in a hoarser tone; 
Their noisy jaws, with bawling now grown wide, 
An ugly sight! extend on either side: 
Their motly back, streak'd with a list of green, 
Joyn'd to their head, without a neck is seen; 
And, with a belly broad and white, they look 
Meer frogs, and still frequent the muddy brook. 

Scarce had the man this famous story told, 
Of vengeance on the Lycians shown of old, 
When strait another pictures to their view 
The Satyr's fate, whom angry Phoebus slew; 
Who, rais'd with high conceit, and puff'd with pride, 
At his own pipe the skilful God defy'd. 
Why do you tear me from my self, he cries? 
Ah cruel! must my skin be made the prize? 
This for a silly pipe? he roaring said, 
Mean-while the skin from off his limbs was flay'd. 
All bare, and raw, one large continu'd wound, 
With streams of blood his body bath'd the ground. 
The blueish veins their trembling pulse disclos'd, 
The stringy nerves lay naked, and expos'd; 
His guts appear'd, distinctly each express'd, 
With ev'ry shining fibre of his breast. 

The Fauns, and Silvans, with the Nymphs that rove 
Among the Satyrs in the shady grove; 
Olympus, known of old, and ev'ry swain 
That fed, or flock, or herd upon the plain, 
Bewail'd the loss; and with their tears that flow'd, 
A kindly moisture on the earth bestow'd; 
That soon, conjoyn'd, and in a body rang'd, 
Sprung from the ground, to limpid water chang'd; 
Which, down thro' Phrygia's rocks, a mighty stream, 
Comes tumbling to the sea, and Marsya is its name. 

From these relations strait the people turn 
To present truths, and lost Amphion mourn: 
The mother most was blam'd, yet some relate 
That Pelops pity'd, and bewail'd her fate, 
And stript his cloaths, and laid his shoulder bare, 
And made the iv'ry miracle appear. 
This shoulder, from the first, was form'd of flesh, 
As lively as the other, and as fresh; 
But, when the youth was by his father slain, 
The Gods restor'd his mangled limbs again; 
Only that place which joins the neck and arm, 
The rest untouch'd, was found to suffer harm: 
The loss of which an iv'ry piece sustain'd; 
And thus the youth his limbs, and life regain'd. 

To Thebes the neighb'ring princes all repair, 
And with condolance the misfortune share. 
Each bord'ring state in solemn form address'd, 
And each betimes a friendly grief express'd. 
Argos, with Sparta's, and Mycenae's towns, 
And Calydon, yet free from fierce Diana's frowns. 
Corinth for finest brass well fam'd of old, 
Orthomenos for men of courage bold: 
Cleonae lying in the lowly dale, 
And rich Messene with its fertile vale: 
Pylos, for Nestor's City after fam'd, 
And Troezen, not as yet from Pittheus nam'd. 
And those fair cities, which are hem'd around 
By double seas within the Isthmian ground; 
And those, which farther from the sea-coast stand, 
Lodg'd in the bosom of the spacious land. 

Who can believe it? Athens was the last: 
Tho' for politeness fam'd for ages past. 
For a strait siege, which then their walls enclos'd, 
Such acts of kind humanity oppos'd: 
And thick with ships, from foreign nations bound, 
Sea-ward their city lay invested round. 

These, with auxiliar forces led from far, 
Tereus of Thrace, brave, and inur'd to war, 
Had quite defeated, and obtain'd a name, 
The warrior's due, among the sons of Fame. 
This, with his wealth, and pow'r, and ancient line, 
From Mars deriv'd, Pandions's thoughts incline 
His daughter Procne with the prince to joyn. 

Nor Hymen, nor the Graces here preside, 
Nor Juno to befriend the blooming bride; 
But Fiends with fun'ral brands the process led, 
And Furies waited at the Genial bed: 
And all night long the scrieching owl aloof, 
With baleful notes, sate brooding o'er the roof. 
With such ill Omens was the match begun, 
That made them parents of a hopeful son. 
Now Thrace congratulates their seeming joy, 
And they, in thankful rites, their minds employ. 
If the fair queen's espousals pleas'd before, 
Itys, the new-born prince, now pleases more; 
And each bright day, the birth, and bridal feast, 
Were kept with hallow'd pomp above the rest. 
So far true happiness may lye conceal'd, 
When, by false lights, we fancy 'tis reveal'd! 

Now, since their nuptials, had the golden sun 
Five courses round his ample zodiac run; 
When gentle Procne thus her lord address'd, 
And spoke the secret wishes of her breast: 
If I, she said, have ever favour found, 
Let my petition with success be crown'd: 
Let me at Athens my dear sister see, 
Or let her come to Thrace, and visit me. 
And, lest my father should her absence mourn, 
Promise that she shall make a quick return. 
With thanks I'd own the obligation due 
Only, o Tereus, to the Gods, and you. 

Now, ply'd with oar, and sail at his command, 
The nimble gallies reach'd th' Athenian land, 
And anchor'd in the fam'd Piraean bay, 
While Tereus to the palace takes his way; 
The king salutes, and ceremonies past, 
Begins the fatal embassy at last; 
The occasion of his voyage he declares, 
And, with his own, his wife's request prefers: 
Asks leave that, only for a little space, 
Their lovely sister might embark for Thrace. 

Thus while he spoke, appear'd the royal maid, 
Bright Philomela, splendidly array'd; 
But most attractive in her charming face, 
And comely person, turn'd with ev'ry grace: 
Like those fair Nymphs, that are describ'd to rove 
Across the glades, and op'nings of the grove; 
Only that these are dress'd for silvan sports, 
And less become the finery of courts. 

Tereus beheld the virgin, and admir'd, 
And with the coals of burning lust was fir'd: 
Like crackling stubble, or the summer hay, 
When forked lightnings o'er the meadows play. 
Such charms in any breast might kindle love, 
But him the heats of inbred lewdness move; 
To which, tho' Thrace is naturally prone, 
Yet his is still superior, and his own. 
Strait her attendants he designs to buy, 
And with large bribes her governess would try: 
Herself with ample gifts resolves to bend, 
And his whole kingdom in th' attempt expend: 
Or, snatch'd away by force of arms, to bear, 
And justify the rape with open war. 
The boundless passion boils within his breast, 
And his projecting soul admits no rest. 

And now, impatient of the least delay, 
By pleading Procne's cause, he speeds his way: 
The eloquence of love his tongue inspires, 
And, in his wife's, he speaks his own desires; 
Hence all his importunities arise, 
And tears unmanly trickle from his eyes. 

Ye Gods! what thick involving darkness blinds 
The stupid faculties of mortal minds! 
Tereus the credit of good-nature gains 
From these his crimes; so well the villain feigns. 
And, unsuspecting of his base designs, 
In the request fair Philomela joyns; 
Her snowy arms her aged sire embrace, 
And clasp his neck with an endearing grace: 
Only to see her sister she entreats, 
A seeming blessing, which a curse compleats. 
Tereus surveys her with a luscious eye, 
And in his mind forestalls the blissful joy: 
Her circling arms a scene of lust inspire, 
And ev'ry kiss foments the raging fire. 
Fondly he wishes for the father's place, 
To feel, and to return the warm embrace; 
Since not the nearest ties of filial blood 
Would damp his flame, and force him to be good. 

At length, for both their sakes, the king agrees; 
And Philomela, on her bended knees, 
Thanks him for what her fancy calls success, 
When cruel fate intends her nothing less. 

Now Phoebus, hastning to ambrosial rest, 
His fiery steeds drove sloping down the west: 
The sculptur'd gold with sparkling wines was fill'd, 
And, with rich meats, each chearful table smil'd. 
Plenty, and mirth the royal banquet close, 
Then all retire to sleep, and sweet repose. 
But the lewd monarch, tho' withdrawn apart, 
Still feels love's poison rankling in his heart: 
Her face divine is stamp'd within his breast, 
Fancy imagines, and improves the rest: 
And thus, kept waking by intense desire, 
He nourishes his own prevailing fire. 

Next day the good old king for Tereus sends, 
And to his charge the virgin recommends; 
His hand with tears th' indulgent father press'd, 
Then spoke, and thus with tenderness address'd. 

Since the kind instances of pious love, 
Do all pretence of obstacle remove; 
Since Procne's, and her own, with your request, 
O'er-rule the fears of a paternal breast; 
With you, dear son, my daughter I entrust, 
And by the Gods adjure you to be just; 
By truth, and ev'ry consanguineal tye, 
To watch, and guard her with a father's eye. 
And, since the least delay will tedious prove, 
In keeping from my sight the child I love, 
With speed return her, kindly to asswage 
The tedious troubles of my lingring age. 
And you, my Philomel, let it suffice, 
To know your sister's banish'd from my eyes; 
If any sense of duty sways your mind, 
Let me from you the shortest absence find. 
He wept; then kiss'd his child; and while he speaks, 
The tears fall gently down his aged cheeks. 
Next, as a pledge of fealty, he demands, 
And, with a solemn charge, conjoyns their hands; 
Then to his daughter, and his grandson sends, 
And by their mouth a blessing recommends; 
While, in a voice with dire forebodings broke, 
Sobbing, and faint, the last farewel was spoke. 

Now Philomela, scarce receiv'd on board, 
And in the royal gilded bark secur'd, 
Beheld the dashes of the bending oar, 
The ruffled sea, and the receding shore; 
When strait (his joy impatient of disguise) 
We've gain'd our point, the rough Barbarian cries; 
Now I possess the dear, the blissful hour, 
And ev'ry wish subjected to my pow'r. 
Transports of lust his vicious thoughts employ, 
And he forbears, with pain, th' expected joy. 
His gloting eyes incessantly survey'd 
The virgin beauties of the lovely maid: 
As when the bold rapacious bird of Jove, 
With crooked talons stooping from above, 
Has snatcht, and carry'd to his lofty nest 
A captive hare, with cruel gripes opprest; 
Secure, with fix'd, and unrelenting eyes, 
He sits, and views the helpless, trembling prize. 

Their vessels now had made th' intended land, 
And all with joy descend upon the strand; 
When the false tyrant seiz'd the princely maid, 
And to a lodge in distant woods convey'd; 
Pale, sinking, and distress'd with jealous fears, 
And asking for her sister all in tears. 
The letcher, for enjoyment fully bent, 
No longer now conceal'd his base intent; 
But with rude haste the bloomy girl deflow'r'd, 
Tender, defenceless, and with ease o'erpower'd. 
Her piercing accents to her sire complain, 
And to her absent sister, but in vain: 
In vain she importunes, with doleful cries, 
Each unattentive godhead of the skies. 
She pants and trembles, like the bleating prey, 
From some close-hunted wolf just snatch'd away; 
That still, with fearful horror, looks around, 
And on its flank regards the bleeding wound. 
Or, as the tim'rous dove, the danger o'er, 
Beholds her shining plumes besmear'd with gore, 
And, tho' deliver'd from the faulcon's claw, 
Yet shivers, and retains a secret awe. 

But when her mind a calm reflection shar'd, 
And all her scatter'd spirits were repair'd: 
Torn, and disorder'd while her tresses hung, 
Her livid hands, like one that mourn'd, she wrung; 
Then thus, with grief o'erwhelm'd her languid eyes, 
Savage, inhumane, cruel wretch! she cries; 
Whom not a parent's strict commands could move, 
Tho' charg'd, and utter'd with the tears of love; 
Nor virgin innocence, nor all that's due 
To the strong contract of the nuptial vow: 
Virtue, by this, in wild confusion's laid, 
And I compell'd to wrong my sister's bed; 
Whilst you, regardless of your marriage oath, 
With stains of incest have defil'd us both. 
Tho' I deserv'd some punishment to find, 
This was, ye Gods! too cruel, and unkind. 
Yet, villain, to compleat your horrid guilt, 
Stab here, and let my tainted blood be spilt. 
Oh happy! had it come, before I knew 
The curs'd embrace of vile perfidious you; 
Then my pale ghost, pure from incestuous love, 
Had wander'd spotless thro' th' Elysian grove. 
But, if the Gods above have pow'r to know, 
And judge those actions that are done below; 
Unless the dreaded thunders of the sky, 
Like me, subdu'd, and violated lye; 
Still my revenge shall take its proper time, 
And suit the baseness of your hellish crime. 
My self, abandon'd, and devoid of shame, 
Thro' the wide world your actions will proclaim; 
Or tho' I'm prison'd in this lonely den, 
Obscur'd, and bury'd from the sight of men, 
My mournful voice the pitying rocks shall move, 
And my complainings eccho thro' the grove. 
Hear me, o Heav'n! and, if a God be there, 
Let him regard me, and accept my pray'r. 

Struck with these words, the tyrant's guilty breast 
With fear, and anger, was, by turns, possest; 
Now, with remorse his conscience deeply stung, 
He drew the faulchion that beside her hung, 
And first her tender arms behind her bound, 
Then drag'd her by the hair along the ground. 
The princess willingly her throat reclin'd, 
And view'd the steel with a contented mind; 
But soon her tongue the girding pinchers strain, 
With anguish, soon she feels the piercing pain: 
Oh father! father! would fain have spoke, 
But the sharp torture her intention broke; 
In vain she tries, for now the blade has cut 
Her tongue sheer off, close to the trembling root. 
The mangled part still quiver'd on the ground, 
Murmuring with a faint imperfect sound: 
And, as a serpent writhes his wounded train, 
Uneasy, panting, and possess'd with pain; 
The piece, while life remain'd, still trembled fast, 
And to its mistress pointed to the last. 

Yet, after this so damn'd, and black a deed, 
Fame (which I scarce can credit) has agreed, 
That on her rifled charms, still void of shame, 
He frequently indulg'd his lustful flame, 
At last he ventures to his Procne's sight, 
Loaded with guilt, and cloy'd with long delight; 
There, with feign'd grief, and false, dissembled sighs, 
Begins a formal narrative of lies; 
Her sister's death he artfully declares, 
Then weeps, and raises credit from his tears. 
Her vest, with flow'rs of gold embroider'd o'er, 
With grief distress'd, the mournful matron tore, 
And a beseeming suit of gloomy sable wore. 
With cost, an honorary tomb she rais'd, 
And thus th' imaginary ghost appeas'd. 
Deluded queen! the fate of her you love, 
Nor grief, nor pity, but revenge should move. 

Thro' the twelve signs had pass'd the circling sun, 
And round the compass of the Zodiac run; 
What must unhappy Philomela do, 
For ever subject to her keeper's view? 
Huge walls of massy stone the lodge surround, 
From her own mouth no way of speaking's found. 
But all our wants by wit may be supply'd, 
And art makes up, what fortune has deny'd: 
With skill exact a Phrygian web she strung, 
Fix'd to a loom that in her chamber hung, 
Where in-wrought letters, upon white display'd, 
In purple notes, her wretched case betray'd: 
The piece, when finish'd, secretly she gave 
Into the charge of one poor menial slave; 
And then, with gestures, made him understand, 
It must be safe convey'd to Procne's hand. 
The slave, with speed, the queen's apartment sought, 
And render'd up his charge, unknowing what he brought. 
But when the cyphers, figur'd in each fold, 
Her sister's melancholy story told 
(Strange that she could!) with silence, she survey'd 
The tragick piece, and without weeping read: 
In such tumultuous haste her passions sprung, 
They choak'd her voice, and quite disarm'd her tongue. 
No room for female tears; the Furies rise, 
Darting vindictive glances from her eyes; 
And, stung with rage, she bounds from place to place, 
While stern revenge sits low'ring in her face. 

Now the triennial celebration came, 
Observ'd to Bacchus by each Thracian dame; 
When, in the privacies of night retir'd, 
They act his rites, with sacred rapture fir'd: 
By night, the tinkling cymbals ring around, 
While the shrill notes from Rhodope resound; 
By night, the queen, disguis'd, forsakes the court, 
To mingle in the festival resort. 
Leaves of the curling vine her temples shade, 
And, with a circling wreath, adorn her head: 
Adown her back the stag's rough spoils appear, 
Light on her shoulder leans a cornel spear. 

Thus, in the fury of the God conceal'd, 
Procne her own mad headstrong passion veil'd; 
Now, with her gang, to the thick wood she flies, 
And with religious yellings fills the skies; 
The fatal lodge, as 'twere by chance, she seeks, 
And, thro' the bolted doors, an entrance breaks; 
From thence, her sister snatching by the hand, 
Mask'd like the ranting Bacchanalian band, 
Within the limits of the court she drew, 
Shading, with ivy green, her outward hue. 
But Philomela, conscious of the place, 
Felt new reviving pangs of her disgrace; 
A shiv'ring cold prevail'd in ev'ry part, 
And the chill'd blood ran trembling to her heart. 

Soon as the queen a fit retirement found, 
Stript of the garlands that her temples crown'd, 
She strait unveil'd her blushing sister's face, 
And fondly clasp'd her with a close embrace: 
But, in confusion lost, th' unhappy maid, 
With shame dejected, hung her drooping head, 
As guilty of a crime that stain'd her sister's bed. 
That speech, that should her injur'd virtue clear, 
And make her spotless innocence appear, 
Is now no more; only her hands, and eyes 
Appeal, in signals, to the conscious skies. 
In Procne's breast the rising passions boil, 
And burst in anger with a mad recoil; 
Her sister's ill-tim'd grief, with scorn, she blames, 
Then, in these furious words her rage proclaims. 

Tears, unavailing, but defer our time, 
The stabbing sword must expiate the crime; 
Or worse, if wit, on bloody vengeance bent, 
A weapon more tormenting can invent. 
O sister! I've prepar'd my stubborn heart, 
To act some hellish, and unheard-of part; 
Either the palace to surround with fire, 
And see the villain in the flames expire; 
Or, with a knife, dig out his cursed eyes, 
Or, his false tongue with racking engines seize; 
Or, cut away the part that injur'd you, 
And, thro' a thousand wounds, his guilty soul pursue. 
Tortures enough my passion has design'd, 
But the variety distracts my mind. 

A-while, thus wav'ring, stood the furious dame, 
When Itys fondling to his mother came; 
From him the cruel fatal hint she took, 
She view'd him with a stern remorseless look: 
Ah! but too like thy wicked sire, she said, 
Forming the direful purpose in her head. 
At this a sullen grief her voice supprest, 
While silent passions struggle in her breast. 

Now, at her lap arriv'd, the flatt'ring boy 
Salutes his parent with a smiling joy: 
About her neck his little arms are thrown, 
And he accosts her in a pratling tone. 
Then her tempestuous anger was allay'd, 
And in its full career her vengeance stay'd; 
While tender thoughts, in spite of passion, rise, 
And melting tears disarm her threat'ning eyes. 
But when she found the mother's easy heart, 
Too fondly swerving from th' intended part; 
Her injur'd sister's face again she view'd: 
And, as by turns surveying both she stood, 
While this fond boy (she said) can thus express 
The moving accents of his fond address; 
Why stands my sister of her tongue bereft, 
Forlorn, and sad, in speechless silence left? 
O Procne, see the fortune of your house! 
Such is your fate, when match'd to such a spouse! 
Conjugal duty, if observ'd to him, 
Would change from virtue, and become a crime; 
For all respect to Tereus must debase 
The noble blood of great Pandion's race. 

Strait at these words, with big resentment fill'd, 
Furious her look, she flew, and seiz'd her child; 
Like a fell tigress of the savage kind, 
That drags the tender suckling of the hind 
Thro' India's gloomy groves, where Ganges laves 
The shady scene, and rouls his streamy waves. 

Now to a close apartment they were come, 
Far off retir'd within the spacious dome; 
When Procne, on revengeful mischief bent, 
Home to his heart a piercing ponyard sent. 
Itys, with rueful cries, but all too late, 
Holds out his hands, and deprecates his fate; 
Still at his mother's neck he fondly aims, 
And strives to melt her with endearing names; 
Yet still the cruel mother perseveres, 
Nor with concern his bitter anguish hears. 
This might suffice; but Philomela too 
Across his throat a shining curtlass drew. 
Then both, with knives, dissect each quiv'ring part, 
And carve the butcher'd limbs with cruel art; 
Which, whelm'd in boiling cauldrons o'er the fire, 
Or turn'd on spits, in steamy smoak aspire: 
While the long entries, with their slipp'ry floor, 
Run down in purple streams of clotted gore. 

Ask'd by his wife to this inhuman feast, 
Tereus unknowingly is made a guest: 
Whilst she her plot the better to disguise, 
Styles it some unknown mystick sacrifice; 
And such the nature of the hallow'd rite, 
The wife her husband only could invite, 
The slaves must all withdraw, and be debarr'd the sight.

Tereus, upon a throne of antique state, 
Loftily rais'd, before the banquet sate; 
And glutton like, luxuriously pleas'd, 
With his own flesh his hungry maw appeas'd. 
Nay, such a blindness o'er his senses falls, 
That he for Itys to the table calls. 
When Procne, now impatient to disclose 
The joy that from her full revenge arose, 
Cries out, in transports of a cruel mind, 
Within your self your Itys you may find. 
Still, at this puzzling answer, with surprise, 
Around the room he sends his curious eyes; 
And, as he still inquir'd, and call'd aloud, 
Fierce Philomela, all besmear'd with blood, 
Her hands with murder stain'd, her spreading hair 
Hanging dishevel'd with a ghastly air, 
Stept forth, and flung full in the tyrant's face 
The head of Itys, goary as it was: 
Nor ever so much to use her tongue, 
And with a just reproach to vindicate her wrong. 

The Thracian monarch from the table flings, 
While with his cries the vaulted parlour rings; 
His imprecations eccho down to Hell, 
And rouze the snaky Furies from their Stygian cell. 
One while he labours to disgorge his breast, 
And free his stomach from the cursed feast; 
Then, weeping o'er his lamentable doom, 
He styles himself his son's sepulchral tomb. 
Now, with drawn sabre, and impetuous speed, 
In close pursuit he drives Pandion's breed; 
Whose nimble feet spring with so swift a force 
Across the fields, they seem to wing their course. 
And now, on real wings themselves they raise, 
And steer their airy flight by diff'rent ways; 
One to the woodland's shady covert hies, 
Around the smoaky roof the other flies; 
Whose feathers yet the marks of murder stain, 
Where stampt upon her breast, the crimson spots remain. 
Tereus, through grief, and haste to be reveng'd, 
Shares the like fate, and to a bird is chang'd: 
Fix'd on his head, the crested plumes appear, 
Long is his beak, and sharpen'd like a spear; 
Thus arm'd, his looks his inward mind display, 
And, to a lapwing turn'd, he fans his way. 
Exceeding trouble, for his children's fate, 
Shorten'd Pandion's days, and chang'd his date; 
Down to the shades below, with sorrow spent, 
An earlier, unexpected ghost he went. 

Erechtheus next th' Athenian sceptre sway'd, 
Whose rule the state with joynt consent obey'd; 
So mix'd his justice with his valour flow'd, 
His reign one scene of princely goodness shew'd. 
Four hopeful youths, as many females bright, 
Sprung from his loyns, and sooth'd him with delight. 

Two of these sisters, of a lovelier air, 
Excell'd the rest, tho' all the rest were fair. 
Procris, to Cephalus in wedlock ty'd, 
Bless'd the young silvan with a blooming bride: 
For Orithyia Boreas suffer'd pain, 
For the coy maid sued long, but sued in vain; 
Tereus his neighbour, and his Thracian blood, 
Against the match a main objection stood; 
Which made his vows, and all his suppliant love, 
Empty as air and ineffectual prove. 

But when he found his soothing flatt'ries fail, 
Nor saw his soft addresses cou'd avail; 
Blust'ring with ire, he quickly has recourse 
To rougher arts, and his own native force. 
'Tis well, he said; such usage is my due, 
When thus disguis'd by foreign ways I sue; 
When my stern airs, and fierceness I disclaim, 
And sigh for love, ridiculously tame; 
When soft addresses foolishly I try, 
Nor my own stronger remedies apply. 
By force and violence I chiefly live, 
By them the lowring stormy tempests drive; 
In foaming billows raise the hoary deep, 
Writhe knotted oaks, and sandy desarts sweep; 
Congeal the falling flakes of fleecy snow, 
And bruise, with ratling hall, the plains below. 
I, and my brother-winds, when joyn'd above, 
Thro' the waste champian of the skies we rove, 
With such a boist'rous full career engage, 
That Heav'n's whole concave thunders at our rage. 
While, struck from nitrous clouds, fierce lightnings play,

Dart thro' the storm, and gild the gloomy day. 
Or when, in subterraneous caverns pent, 
My breath, against the hollow Earth, is bent, 
The quaking world above, and ghosts below, 
My mighty pow'r, by dear experience, know, 
Tremble with fear, and dread the fatal blow. 
This is the only cure to be apply'd, 
Thus to Erechtheus I should be ally'd; 
And thus the scornful virgin should be woo'd, 
Not by intreaty, but by force subdu'd. 

Boreas, in passion, spoke these huffing things, 
And, as he spoke, he shook his dreadful wings; 
At which, afar the shiv'ring sea was fan'd, 
And the wide surface of the distant land: 
His dusty mantle o'er the hills he drew, 
And swept the lowly vallies, as he flew; 
Then, with his yellow wings, embrac'd the maid, 
And, wrapt in dusky clouds, far off convey'd. 
The sparkling blaze of Love's prevailing fire 
Shone brighter as he flew, and flam'd the higher. 
And now the God, possess'd of his delight, 
To northern Thrace pursu'd his airy flight, 
Where the young ravish'd nymph became his bride, 
And soon the luscious sweets of wedlock try'd. 

Two lovely twins, th' effect of this embrace, 
Crown their soft labours, and their nuptials grace; 
Who, like their mother, beautiful, and fair, 
Their father's strength, and feather'd pinions share: 
Yet these, at first, were wanting, as 'tis said, 
And after, as they grew, their shoulders spread. 
Zethes and Calais, the pretty twins, 
Remain'd unfledg'd, while smooth their beardless chins; 
But when, in time, the budding silver down 
Shaded their face, and on their cheeks was grown, 
Two sprouting wings upon their shoulders sprung, 
Like those in birds, that veil the callow young. 
Then as their age advanc'd, and they began 
From greener youth to ripen into man, 
With Jason's Argonauts they cross'd the seas, 
Embark'd in quest of the fam'd golden fleece; 
There, with the rest, the first frail vessel try'd, 
And boldly ventur'd on the swelling tide. 

The Argonauts now stemm'd the foaming tide, 
And to Arcadia's shore their course apply'd; 
Where sightless Phineus spent his age in grief, 
But Boreas' sons engage in his relief; 
And those unwelcome guests, the odious race 
Of Harpyes, from the monarch's table chase. 
With Jason then they greater toils sustain, 
And Phasis' slimy banks at last they gain, 
Here boldly they demand the golden prize 
Of Scythia's king, who sternly thus replies: 
That mighty labours they must first o'ercome, 
Or sail their Argo thence unfreighted home. 
Meanwhile Medea, seiz'd with fierce desire, 
By reason strives to quench the raging fire; 
But strives in vain!- Some God (she said) withstands, 
And reason's baffl'd council countermands. 
What unseen Pow'r does this disorder move? 
'Tis love,- at least 'tis like, what men call love. 
Else wherefore shou'd the king's commands appear 
To me too hard?- But so indeed they are. 
Why shou'd I for a stranger fear, lest he 
Shou'd perish, whom I did but lately see? 
His death, or safety, what are they to me? 
Wretch, from thy virgin-breast this flame expel, 
And soon- Oh cou'd I, all wou'd then be well! 
But love, resistless love, my soul invades; 
Discretion this, affection that perswades. 
I see the right, and I approve it too, 
Condemn the wrong- and yet the wrong pursue. 
Why, royal maid, shou'dst thou desire to wed 
A wanderer, and court a foreign bed? 
Thy native land, tho' barb'rous, can present 
A bridegroom worth a royal bride's content: 
And whether this advent'rer lives, or dies, 
In Fate, and Fortune's fickle pleasure lies. 
Yet may be live! for to the Pow'rs above, 
A virgin, led by no impulse of love, 
So just a suit may, for the guiltless, move. 
Whom wou'd not Jason's valour, youth and blood 
Invite? or cou'd these merits be withstood, 
At least his charming person must encline 
The hardest heart- I'm sure 'tis so with mine! 
Yet, if I help him not, the flaming breath 
Of bulls, and earth-born foes, must be his death. 
Or, should he through these dangers force his way, 
At last he must be made the dragon's prey. 
If no remorse for such distress I feel, 
I am a tigress, and my breast is steel. 
Why do I scruple then to see him slain, 
And with the tragick scene my eyes prophane? 
My magick's art employ, not to asswage 
The Salvages, but to enflame their rage? 
His earth-born foes to fiercer fury move, 
And accessary to his murder prove? 
The Gods forbid- But pray'rs are idle breath, 
When action only can prevent his death. 
Shall I betray my father, and the state, 
To intercept a rambling hero's fate; 
Who may sail off next hour, and sav'd from harms 
By my assistance, bless another's arms? 
Whilst I, not only of my hopes bereft, 
But to unpity'd punishment am left. 
If he is false, let the ingrateful bleed! 
But no such symptom in his looks I read. 
Nature wou'd ne'er have lavish'd so much grace 
Upon his person, if his soul were base. 
Besides, he first shall plight his faith, and swear 
By all the Gods; what therefore can'st thou fear? 
Medea haste, from danger set him free, 
Jason shall thy eternal debtor be. 
And thou, his queen, with sov'raign state enstall'd, 
By Graecian dames the Kind Preserver call'd. 
Hence idle dreams, by love-sick fancy bred! 
Wilt thou, Medea, by vain wishes led, 
To sister, brother, father bid adieu? 
Forsake thy country's Gods, and country too? 
My father's harsh, my brother but a child, 
My sister rivals me, my country's wild; 
And for its Gods, the greatest of 'em all 
Inspires my breast, and I obey his call. 
That great endearments I forsake, is true, 
But greater far the hopes that I pursue: 
The pride of having sav'd the youths of Greece 
(Each life more precious than our golden fleece); 
A nobler soil by me shall be possest, 
I shall see towns with arts and manners blest; 
And, what I prize above the world beside, 
Enjoy my Jason- and when once his bride, 
Be more than mortal, and to Gods ally'd. 
They talk of hazards I must first sustain, 
Of floating islands justling in the main; 
Our tender barque expos'd to dreadful shocks 
Of fierce Charybdis' gulf, and Scylla's rocks, 
Where breaking waves in whirling eddies rowl, 
And rav'nous dogs that in deep caverns howl: 
Amidst these terrors, while I lye possest 
Of him I love, and lean on Jason's breast, 
In tempests unconcern'd I will appear, 
Or, only for my husband's safety fear. 
Didst thou say husband?- canst thou so deceive 
Thy self, fond maid, and thy own cheat believe? 
In vain thou striv'st to varnish o'er thy shame, 
And grace thy guilt with wedlock's sacred name. 
Pull off the coz'ning masque, and oh! in time 
Discover and avoid the fatal crime. 
She ceas'd- the Graces now, with kind surprize, 
And virtue's lovely train, before her eyes 
Present themselves, and vanquish'd Cupid flies. 

She then retires to Hecate's shrine, that stood 
Far in the covert of a shady wood: 
She finds the fury of her flames asswag'd, 
But, seeing Jason there, again they rag'd. 
Blushes, and paleness did by turns invade 
Her tender cheeks, and secret grief betray'd. 
As fire, that sleeping under ashes lyes, 
Fresh-blown, and rous'd, does up in blazes rise, 
So flam'd the virgin's breast- 
New kindled by her lover's sparkling eyes. 
For chance, that day, had with uncommon grace 
Adorn'd the lovely youth, and through his face 
Display'd an air so pleasing as might charm 
A Goddess, and a Vestal's bosom warm. 
Her ravish'd eyes survey him o'er and o'er, 
As some gay wonder never seen before; 
Transported to the skies she seems to be, 
And thinks she gazes on a deity. 
But when he spoke, and prest her trembling hand, 
And did with tender words her aid demand, 
With vows, and oaths to make her soon his bride, 
She wept a flood of tears, and thus reply'd: 
I see my error, yet to ruin move, 
Nor owe my fate to ignorance, but love: 
Your life I'll guard, and only crave of you 
To swear once more- and to your oath be true. 
He swears by Hecate he would all fulfil, 
And by her grandfather's prophetick skill, 
By ev'ry thing that doubting love cou'd press, 
His present danger, and desir'd success. 
She credits him, and kindly does produce 
Enchanted herbs, and teaches him their use: 
Their mystick names, and virtues he admires, 
And with his booty joyfully retires. 

Impatient for the wonders of the day, 
Aurora drives the loyt'ring stars away. 
Now Mars's mount the pressing people fill, 
The crowd below, the nobles crown the hill; 
The king himself high-thron'd above the rest, 
With iv'ry scepter, and in purple drest. 

Forthwith the brass-hoof'd bulls are set at large, 
Whose furious nostrils sulph'rous flame discharge: 
The blasted herbage by their breath expires; 
As forges rumble with excessive fires, 
And furnaces with fiercer fury glow, 
When water on the panting mass ye throw; 
With such a noise, from their convulsive breast, 
Thro' bellowing throats, the struggling vapour prest. 

Yet Jason marches up without concern, 
While on th' advent'rous youth the monsters turn 
Their glaring eyes, and, eager to engage, 
Brandish their steel-tipt horns in threatning rage: 
With brazen hoofs they beat the ground, and choak 
The ambient air with clouds of dust and smoak: 
Each gazing Graecian for his champion shakes, 
While bold advances he securely makes 
Thro' sindging blasts; such wonders magick art 
Can work, when love conspires, and plays his part. 
The passive savages like statues stand, 
While he their dew-laps stroaks with soothing hand; 
To unknown yokes their brawny necks they yield, 
And, like tame oxen, plow the wond'ring field. 
The Colchians stare; the Graecians shout, and raise 
Their champion's courage with inspiring praise. 

Embolden'd now, on fresh attempts he goes, 
With serpent's teeth the fertile furrows sows; 
The glebe, fermenting with inchanted juice, 
Makes the snake's teeth a human crop produce. 
For as an infant, pris'ner to the womb, 
Contented sleeps, 'till to perfection come, 
Then does the cell's obscure confinement scorn, 
He tosses, throbs, and presses to be born; 
So from the lab'ring Earth no single birth, 
But a whole troop of lusty youths rush forth; 
And, what's more strange, with martial fury warm'd, 
And for encounter all compleatly arm'd; 
In rank and file, as they were sow'd, they stand, 
Impatient for the signal of command. 
No foe but the Aemonian youth appears; 
At him they level their steel-pointed spears; 
His frighted friends, who triumph'd, just before, 
With peals of sighs his desp'rate case deplore: 
And where such hardy warriors are afraid, 
What must the tender, and enamour'd maid? 
Her spirits sink, the blood her cheek forsook; 
She fears, who for his safety undertook: 
She knew the vertue of the spells she gave, 
She knew the force, and knew her lover brave; 
But what's a single champion to an host? 
Yet scorning thus to see him tamely lost, 
Her strong reserve of secret arts she brings, 
And last, her never-failing song she sings. 
Wonders ensue; among his gazing foes 
The massy fragment of a rock he throws; 
This charm in civil war engag'd 'em all; 
By mutual wounds those Earth-born brothers fall. 

The Greeks, transported with the strange success, 
Leap from their seats the conqu'ror to caress; 
Commend, and kiss, and clasp him in their arms: 
So would the kind contriver of the charms; 
But her, who felt the tenderest concern, 
Honour condemns in secret flames to burn; 
Committed to a double guard of fame, 
Aw'd by a virgin's, and a princess' name. 
But thoughts are free, and fancy unconfin'd, 
She kisses, courts, and hugs him in her mind; 
To fav'ring Pow'rs her silent thanks she gives, 
By whose indulgence her lov'd hero lives. 

One labour more remains, and, tho' the last, 
In danger far surmounting all the past; 
That enterprize by Fates in store was kept, 
To make the dragon sleep that never slept, 
Whose crest shoots dreadful lustre; from his jaws 
A tripple tire of forked stings he draws, 
With fangs, and wings of a prodigious size: 
Such was the guardian of the golden prize. 
Yet him, besprinkled with Lethaean dew, 
The fair inchantress into slumber threw; 
And then, to fix him, thrice she did repeat 
The rhyme, that makes the raging winds retreat, 
In stormy seas can halcyon seasons make, 
Turn rapid streams into a standing lake; 
While the soft guest his drowzy eye-lids seals, 
Th' ungarded golden fleece the stranger steals; 
Proud to possess the purchase of his toil, 
Proud of his royal bride, the richer spoil; 
To sea both prize, and patroness he bore, 
And lands triumphant on his native shore. 

Aemonian matrons, who their absence mourn'd, 
Rejoyce to see their prosp'rous sons return'd: 
Rich curling fumes of incense feast the skies, 
An hecatomb of voted victims dies, 
With gilded horns, and garlands on their head, 
And all the pomp of death, to th' altar led. 
Congratulating bowls go briskly round, 
Triumphant shouts in louder musick drown'd. 
Amidst these revels, why that cloud of care 
On Jason's brow? (to whom the largest share 
Of mirth was due)- His father was not there. 
Aeson was absent, once the young, and brave, 
Now crush'd with years, and bending to the grave. 
At last withdrawn, and by the crowd unseen, 
Pressing her hand (with starting sighs between), 
He supplicates his kind, and skilful queen. 

O patroness! preserver of my life! 
(Dear when my mistress, and much dearer wife) 
Your favours to so vast a sum amount, 
'Tis past the pow'r of numbers to recount; 
Or cou'd they be to computation brought, 
The history would a romance be thought: 
And yet, unless you add one favour more, 
Greater than all that you conferr'd before, 
But not too hard for love and magick skill, 
Your past are thrown away, and Jason's wretched still. 
The morning of my life is just begun, 
But my declining father's race is run; 
From my large stock retrench the long arrears, 
And add 'em to expiring Aeson's years. 

Thus spake the gen'rous youth, and wept the rest. 
Mov'd with the piety of his request, 
To his ag'd sire such filial duty shown, 
So diff'rent from her treatment of her own, 
But still endeav'ring her remorse to hide, 
She check'd her rising sighs, and thus reply'd. 

How cou'd the thought of such inhuman wrong 
Escape (said she) from pious Jason's tongue? 
Does the whole world another Jason bear, 
Whose life Medea can to yours prefer? 
Or cou'd I with so dire a change dispence, 
Hecate will never join in that offence: 
Unjust is the request you make, and I 
In kindness your petition shall deny; 
Yet she that grants not what you do implore, 
Shall yet essay to give her Jason more; 
Find means t' encrease the stock of Aeson's years, 
Without retrenchment of your life's arrears; 
Provided that the triple Goddess join 
A strong confed'rate in my bold design. 

Thus was her enterprize resolv'd; but still 
Three tedious nights are wanting to fulfil 
The circling crescents of th' encreasing moon; 
Then, in the height of her nocturnal noon, 
Medea steals from court; her ankles bare, 
Her garments closely girt, but loose her hair; 
Thus sally'd, like a solitary sprite, 
She traverses the terrors of the night. 

Men, beasts, and birds in soft repose lay charm'd, 
No boistrous wind the mountain-woods alarm'd; 
Nor did those walks of love, the myrtle-trees, 
Of am'rous Zephir hear the whisp'ring breeze; 
All elements chain'd in unactive rest, 
No sense but what the twinkling stars exprest; 
To them (that only wak'd) she rears her arm, 
And thus commences her mysterious charms. 

She turn'd her thrice about, as oft she threw 
On her pale tresses the nocturnal dew; 
Then yelling thrice a most enormous sound, 
Her bare knee bended on the flinty ground. 
O night (said she) thou confident and guide 
Of secrets, such as darkness ought to hide; 
Ye stars and moon, that, when the sun retires, 
Support his empire with succeeding fires; 
And thou, great Hecate, friend to my design; 
Songs, mutt'ring spells, your magick forces join; 
And thou, O Earth, the magazine that yields 
The midnight sorcerer drugs; skies, mountains, fields; 
Ye wat'ry Pow'rs of fountain, stream, and lake; 
Ye sylvan Gods, and Gods of night, awake, 
And gen'rously your parts in my adventure take. 

Oft by your aid swift currents I have led 
Thro' wand'ring banks, back to their fountain head; 
Transformed the prospect of the briny deep, 
Made sleeping billows rave, and raving billows sleep; 
Made clouds, or sunshine; tempests rise, or fall; 
And stubborn lawless winds obey my call: 
With mutter'd words disarm'd the viper's jaw; 
Up by the roots vast oaks, and rocks cou'd draw, 
Make forests dance, and trembling mountains come, 
Like malefactors, to receive their doom; 
Earth groan, and frighted ghosts forsake their tomb. 
Thee, Cynthia, my resistless rhymes drew down, 
When tinkling cymbals strove my voice to drown; 
Nor stronger Titan could their force sustain, 
In full career compell'd to stop his wain: 
Nor could Aurora's virgin blush avail, 
With pois'nous herbs I turn'd her roses pale; 
The fury of the fiery bulls I broke, 
Their stubborn necks submitting to my yoke; 
And when the sons of Earth with fury burn'd, 
Their hostile rage upon themselves I turn'd; 
The brothers made with mutual wounds to bleed, 
And by their fatal strife my lover freed; 
And, while the dragon slept, to distant Greece, 
Thro' cheated guards, convey'd the golden fleece. 
But now to bolder action I proceed, 
Of such prevailing juices now have need, 
That wither'd years back to their bloom can bring, 
And in dead winter raise a second spring. 
And you'll perform't- 
You will; for lo! the stars, with sparkling fires, 
Presage as bright success to my desires: 
And now another happy omen see! 
A chariot drawn by dragons waits for me. 

With these last words he leaps into the wain, 
Stroaks the snakes' necks, and shakes the golden rein; 
That signal giv'n, they mount her to the skies, 
And now beneath her fruitful Tempe lies, 
Whose stories she ransacks, then to Crete she flies; 
There Ossa, Pelion, Othrys, Pindus, all 
To the fair ravisher, a booty fall; 
The tribute of their verdure she collects, 
Nor proud Olympus' height his plants protects. 
Some by the roots she plucks; the tender tops 
Of others with her culling sickle crops. 
Nor could the plunder of the hills suffice, 
Down to the humble vales, and meads she flies; 
Apidanus, Amphrysus, the next rape 
Sustain, nor could Enipeus' bank escape; 
Thro' Beebe's marsh, and thro' the border rang'd 
Whose pasture Glaucus to a Triton chang'd. 

Now the ninth day, and ninth successive night, 
Had wonder'd at the restless rover's flight; 
Mean-while her dragons, fed with no repast, 
But her exhaling simples od'rous blast, 
Their tarnish'd scales, and wrinkled skins had cast. 
At last return'd before her palace gate, 
Quitting her chariot, on the ground she sate; 
The sky her only canopy of state. 
All conversation with her sex she fled, 
Shun'd the caresses of the nuptial bed: 
Two altars next of grassy turf she rears, 
This Hecate's name, that Youth's inscription bears; 
With forest-boughs, and vervain these she crown'd; 
Then delves a double trench in lower ground, 
And sticks a black-fleec'd ram, that ready stood, 
And drench'd the ditches with devoted blood: 
New wine she pours, and milk from th' udder warm, 
With mystick murmurs to compleat the charm, 
And subterranean deities alarm. 
To the stern king of ghosts she next apply'd, 
And gentle Proserpine, his ravish'd bride, 
That for old Aeson with the laws of Fate 
They would dispense, and lengthen his short date; 
Thus with repeated pray'rs she long assails 
Th' infernal tyrant and at last prevails; 
Then calls to have decrepit Aeson brought, 
And stupifies him with a sleeping draught; 
On Earth his body, like a corpse, extends, 
Then charges Jason and his waiting friends 
To quit the place, that no unhallow'd eye 
Into her art's forbidden secrets pry. 
This done, th' inchantress, with her locks unbound, 
About her altars trips a frantick round; 
Piece-meal the consecrated wood she splits, 
And dips the splinters in the bloody pits, 
Then hurles 'em on the piles; the sleeping sire 
She lustrates thrice, with sulphur, water, fire. 

In a large cauldron now the med'cine boils, 
Compounded of her late-collected spoils, 
Blending into the mesh the various pow'rs 
Of wonder-working juices, roots, and flow'rs; 
With gems i' th' eastern ocean's cell refin'd, 
And such as ebbing tides had left behind; 
To them the midnight's pearly dew she flings, 
A scretch-owl's carcase, and ill boding wings; 
Nor could the wizard wolf's warm entrails scape 
(That wolf who counterfeits a human shape). 
Then, from the bottom of her conj'ring bag, 
Snakes' skins, and liver of a long-liv'd stag; 
Last a crow's head to such an age arriv'd, 
That he had now nine centuries surviv'd; 
These, and with these a thousand more that grew 
In sundry soils, into her pot she threw; 
Then with a wither'd olive-bough she rakes 
The bubling broth; the bough fresh verdure takes; 
Green leaves at first the perish'd plant surround, 
Which the next minute with ripe fruit were crown'd. 
The foaming juices now the brink o'er-swell; 
The barren heath, where-e'er the liquor fell, 
Sprang out with vernal grass, and all the pride 
Of blooming May- When this Medea spy'd, 
She cuts her patient's throat; th' exhausted blood 
Recruiting with her new enchanted flood; 
While at his mouth, and thro' his op'ning wound, 
A double inlet her infusion found; 
His feeble frame resumes a youthful air, 
A glossy brown his hoary beard and hair. 
The meager paleness from his aspect fled, 
And in its room sprang up a florid red; 
Thro' all his limbs a youthful vigour flies, 
His empty'd art'ries swell with fresh supplies: 
Gazing spectators scarce believe their eyes. 
But Aeson is the most surpriz'd to find 
A happy change in body and in mind; 
In sense and constitution the same man, 
As when his fortieth active year began. 

Bacchus, who from the clouds this wonder view'd, 
Medea's method instantly pursu'd, 
And his indulgent nurse's youth renew'd. 

Thus far obliging love employ'd her art, 
But now revenge must act a tragick part; 

Medea feigns a mortal quarrel bred 
Betwixt her, and the partner of her bed; 
On this pretence to Pelias' court she flies, 
Who languishing with age and sickness lies: 
His guiltless daughters, with inveigling wiles, 
And well dissembled friendship, she beguiles: 
The strange achievements of her art she tells, 
With Aeson's cure, and long on that she dwells, 
'Till them to firm perswasion she has won, 
The same for their old father may be done: 
For him they court her to employ her skill, 
And put upon the cure what price she will. 
At first she's mute, and with a grave pretence 
Of difficulty, holds 'em in suspense; 
Then promises, and bids 'em, from the fold 
Chuse out a ram, the most infirm and old; 
That so by fact their doubts may be remov'd, 
And first on him the operation prov'd. 

A wreath-horn'd ram is brought, so far o'er-grown 
With years, his age was to that age unknown 
Of sense too dull the piercing point to feel, 
And scarce sufficient blood to stain the steel. 
His carcass she into a cauldron threw, 
With drugs whose vital qualities she knew; 
His limbs grow less, he casts his horns, and years, 
And tender bleatings strike their wond'ring ears. 
Then instantly leaps forth a frisking lamb, 
That seeks (too young to graze) a suckling dam. 
The sisters, thus confirm'd with the success, 
Her promise with renew'd entreaty press; 
To countenance the cheat, three nights and days 
Before experiment th' inchantress stays; 
Then into limpid water, from the springs, 
Weeds, and ingredients of no force she flings; 
With antique ceremonies for pretence 
And rambling rhymes without a word of sense. 

Mean-while the king with all his guards lay bound 
In magick sleep, scarce that of death so sound; 
The daughters now are by the sorc'ress led 
Into his chamber, and surround his bed. 
Your father's health's concern'd, and can ye stay? 
Unnat'ral nymphs, why this unkind delay? 
Unsheath your swords, dismiss his lifeless blood, 
And I'll recruit it with a vital flood: 
Your father's life and health is in your hand, 
And can ye thus like idle gazers stand? 
Unless you are of common sense bereft, 
If yet one spark of piety is left, 
Dispatch a father's cure, and disengage 
The monarch from his toilsome load of age: 
Come- drench your weapons in his putrid gore; 
'Tis charity to wound, when wounding will restore. 

Thus urg'd, the poor deluded maids proceed, 
Betray'd by zeal, to an inhumane deed, 
And, in compassion, make a father bleed. 
Yes, she who had the kindest, tend'rest heart, 
Is foremost to perform the bloody part. 

Yet, tho' to act the butchery betray'd, 
They could not bear to see the wounds they made; 
With looks averted, backward they advance, 
Then strike, and stab, and leave the blows to chance. 

Waking in consternation, he essays 
(Weltring in blood) his feeble arms to raise: 
Environ'd with so many swords- From whence 
This barb'rous usage? what is my offence? 
What fatal fury, what infernal charm, 
'Gainst a kind father does his daughters arm? 

Hearing his voice, as thunder-struck they stopt, 
Their resolution, and their weapons dropt: 
Medea then the mortal blow bestows, 
And that perform'd, the tragick scene to close, 
His corpse into the boiling cauldron throws. 

Then, dreading the revenge that must ensue, 
High mounted on her dragon-coach she flew; 
And in her stately progress thro' the skies, 
Beneath her shady Pelion first she spies, 
With Othrys, that above the clouds did rise; 
With skilful Chiron's cave, and neighb'ring ground, 
For old Cerambus' strange escape renown'd, 
By nymphs deliver'd, when the world was drown'd; 
Who him with unexpected wings supply'd, 
When delug'd hills a safe retreat deny'd. 
Aeolian Pitane on her left hand 
She saw, and there the statu'd dragon stand; 
With Ida's grove, where Bacchus, to disguise 
His son's bold theft, and to secure the prize, 
Made the stoln steer a stag to represent; 
Cocytus' father's sandy monument; 
And fields that held the murder'd sire's remains, 
Where howling Moera frights the startled plains. 
Euryphilus' high town, with tow'rs defac'd 
By Hercules, and matrons more disgrac'd 
With sprouting horns, in signal punishment, 
From Juno, or resenting Venus sent. 
Then Rhodes, which Phoebus did so dearly prize, 
And Jove no less severely did chastize; 
For he the wizard native's pois'ning sight, 
That us'd the farmer's hopeful crops to blight, 
In rage o'erwhelm'd with everlasting night. 
Cartheia's ancient walls come next in view, 
Where once the sire almost a statue grew 
With wonder, which a strange event did move, 
His daughter turn'd into a turtle-dove. 
Then Hyrie's lake, and Tempe's field o'er-ran, 
Fam'd for the boy who there became a swan; 
For there enamour'd Phyllius, like a slave, 
Perform'd what tasks his paramour would crave. 
For presents he had mountain-vultures caught, 
And from the desart a tame lion brought; 
Then a wild bull commanded to subdue, 
The conquer'd savage by the horns he drew; 
But, mock'd so oft, the treatment he disdains, 
And from the craving boy this prize detains. 
Then thus in choler the resenting lad: 
Won't you deliver him?- You'll wish you had: 
Nor sooner said, but, in a peevish mood, 
Leapt from the precipice on which he stood: 
The standers-by were struck with fresh surprize, 
Instead of falling, to behold him rise 
A snowy swan, and soaring to the skies. 

But dearly the rash prank his mother cost, 
Who ignorantly gave her son for lost; 
For his misfortune wept, 'till she became 
A lake, and still renown'd with Hyrie's name. 

Thence to Latona's isle, where once were seen, 
Transform'd to birds, a monarch, and his queen. 
Far off she saw how old Cephisus mourn'd 
His son, into a seele by Phoebus turn'd; 
And where, astonish'd at a stranger sight, 
Eumelus gaz'd on his wing'd daughter's flight. 

Aetolian Pleuron she did next survey, 
Where sons a mother's murder did essay, 
But sudden plumes the matron bore away. 
On her right hand, Cyllene, a fair soil, 
Fair, 'till Menephron there the beauteous hill 
Attempted with foul incest to defile. 

Her harness'd dragons now direct she drives 
For Corinth, and at Corinth she arrives; 
Where, if what old tradition tells, be true, 
In former ages men from mushrooms grew. 

But here Medea finds her bed supply'd, 
During her absence, by another bride; 
And hopeless to recover her lost game, 
She sets both bride and palace in a flame. 
Nor could a rival's death her wrath asswage, 
Nor stopt at Creon's family her rage, 
She murders her own infants, in despight 
To faithless Jason, and in Jason's sight; 
Yet e'er his sword could reach her, up she springs, 
Securely mounted on her dragon's wings. 

From hence to Athens she directs her flight, 
Where Phineus, so renown'd for doing right; 
Where Periphas, and Polyphemon's neece, 
Soaring with sudden plumes amaz'd the towns of Greece. 

Here Aegeus so engaging she addrest, 
That first he treats her like a royal guest; 
Then takes the sorc'ress for his wedded wife; 
The only blemish of his prudent life. 

Mean-while his son, from actions of renown, 
Arrives at court, but to his sire unknown. 
Medea, to dispatch a dang'rous heir 
(She knew him), did a pois'nous draught prepare; 
Drawn from a drug, was long reserv'd in store 
For desp'rate uses, from the Scythian shore; 
That from the Echydnaean monster's jaws 
Deriv'd its origin, and this the cause. 

Thro' a dark cave a craggy passage lies, 
To ours, ascending from the nether skies; 
Thro' which, by strength of hand, Alcides drew 
Chain'd Cerberus, who lagg'd, and restive grew, 
With his blear'd eyes our brighter day to view. 
Thrice he repeated his enormous yell, 
With which he scares the ghosts, and startles Hell; 
At last outragious (tho' compell'd to yield) 
He sheds his foam in fury on the field,- 
Which, with its own, and rankness of the ground, 
Produc'd a weed, by sorcerers renown'd, 
The strongest constitution to confound; 
Call'd Aconite, because it can unlock 
All bars, and force its passage thro' a rock. 

The pious father, by her wheedles won, 
Presents this deadly potion to his son; 
Who, with the same assurance takes the cup, 
And to the monarch's health had drank it up, 
But in the very instant he apply'd 
The goblet to his lips, old Aegeus spy'd 
The iv'ry hilted sword that grac'd his side. 
That certain signal of his son he knew, 
And snatcht the bowl away; the sword he drew, 
Resolv'd, for such a son's endanger'd life, 
To sacrifice the most perfidious wife. 
Revenge is swift, but her more active charms 
A whirlwind rais'd, that snatch'd her from his arms. 
While conjur'd clouds their baffled sense surprize, 
She vanishes from their deluded eyes, 
And thro' the hurricane triumphant flies. 

The gen'rous king, altho' o'er-joy'd to find 
His son was safe, yet bearing still in mind 
The mischief by his treach'rous queen design'd; 
The horrour of the deed, and then how near 
The danger drew, he stands congeal'd with fear. 
But soon that fear into devotion turns, 
With grateful incense ev'ry altar burns; 
Proud victims, and unconscious of their fate, 
Stalk to the temple, there to die in state. 
In Athens never had a day been found 
For mirth, like that grand festival, renown'd. 
Promiscuously the peers, and people dine, 
Promiscuously their thankful voices join, 
In songs of wit, sublim'd by spritely wine. 
To list'ning spheres their joint applause they raise, 
And thus resound their matchless Theseus' praise. 

Great Theseus! Thee the Marathonian plain 
Admires, and wears with pride the noble stain 
Of the dire monster's blood, by valiant Theseus slain. 
That now Cromyon's swains in safety sow, 
And reap their fertile field, to thee they owe. 
By thee th' infested Epidaurian coast 
Was clear'd, and now can a free commerce boast. 
The traveller his journey can pursue, 
With pleasure the late dreadful valley view, 
And cry, Here Theseus the grand robber slew. 
Cephysus' cries to his rescu'd shore, 
The merciless Procrustes is no more. 
In peace, Eleusis, Ceres' rites renew, 
Since Theseus' sword the fierce Cercyon slew. 
By him the tort'rer Sinis was destroy'd, 
Of strength (but strength to barb'rous use employ'd) 
That tops of tallest pines to Earth could bend, 
And thus in pieces wretched captives rend. 
Inhuman Scyron now has breath'd his last, 
And now Alcatho's roads securely past; 
By Theseus slain, and thrown into the deep: 
But Earth nor Sea his scatter'd bones wou'd keep, 
Which, after floating long, a rock became, 
Still infamous with Scyron's hated name. 
When Fame to count thy acts and years proceeds, 
Thy years appear but cyphers to thy deeds. 
For thee, brave youth, as for our common-wealth, 
We pray; and drink, in yours, the publick health. 
Your praise the senate, and plebeians sing, 
With your lov'd name the court, and cottage ring. 
You make our shepherds and our sailors glad, 
And not a house in this vast city's sad. 

But mortal bliss will never come sincere, 
Pleasure may lead, but grief brings up the rear; 
While for his sons' arrival, rev'ling joy 
Aegeus, and all his subjects does employ; 
While they for only costly feasts prepare, 
His neighb'ring monarch, Minos, threatens war: 
Weak in land-forces, nor by sea more strong, 
But pow'rful in a deep resented wrong 
For a son's murder, arm'd with pious rage; 
Yet prudently before he would engage, 
To raise auxiliaries resolv'd to sail, 
And with the pow'rful princes to prevail. 

First Anaphe, then proud Astypalaea gains, 
By presents that, and this by threats obtains: 
Low Mycone, Cymolus, chalky soil, 
Tall Cythnos, Scyros, flat Seriphos' isle; 
Paros, with marble cliffs afar display'd; 
Impregnable Sithonia; yet betray'd 
To a weak foe by a gold-admiring maid, 
Who, chang'd into a daw of sable hue, 
Still hoards up gold, and hides it from the view. 

But as these islands chearfully combine, 
Others refuse t' embark in his design. 
Now leftward with an easy sail he bore, 
And prosp'rous passage to Oenopia's shore; 
Oenopia once, but now Aegina call'd, 
And with his royal mother's name install'd 
By Aeacus, under whose reign did spring 
The Myrmidons, and now their reigning king. 

Down to the port, amidst the rabble, run 
The princes of the blood; with Telamon, 
Peleus the next, and Phocus the third son: 
Then Aeacus, altho' opprest with years, 
To ask the cause of their approach appears. 

That question does the Gnossian's grief renew, 
And sighs from his afflicted bosom drew; 
Yet after a short solemn respite made, 
The ruler of the hundred cities said: 

Assist our arms, rais'd for a murder'd son, 
In this religious war no risque you'll run: 
Revenge the dead- for who refuse to give 
Rest to their urns, unworthy are to live. 

What you request, thus Aeacus replies, 
Not I, but truth and common faith denies; 
Athens and we have long been sworn allies: 
Our leagues are fix'd, confed'rate are our pow'rs, 
And who declare themselves their foes, are ours. 

Minos rejoins, Your league shall dearly cost 
(Yet, mindful how much safer 'twas to boast, 
Than there to waste his forces, and his fame, 
Before in field with his grand foe he came), 
Parts without blows- nor long had left the shore, 
E're into port another navy bore, 
With Cephalus, and all his jolly crew; 
Th' Aeacides their old acquaintance knew: 
The princes bid him welcome, and in state 
Conduct the heroe to their palace gate; 
Who entr'ring, seem'd the charming mein to wear, 
As when in youth he paid his visit there. 
In his right hand an olive-branch he holds, 
And, salutation past, the chief unfolds 
His embassy from the Athenian state, 
Their mutual friendship, leagues of ancient date; 
Their common danger, ev'ry thing cou'd wake 
Concern, and his address successful make: 
Strength'ning his plea with all the charms of sense, 
And those, with all the charms of eloquence. 

Then thus the king: Like suitors do you stand 
For that assistance which you may command? 
Athenians, all our listed forces use 
(They're such as no bold service will refuse); 
And when y' ave drawn them off, the Gods be prais'd, 
Fresh legions can within our isle be rais'd: 
So stock'd with people, that we can prepare 
Both for domestick, and for distant war, 
Ours, or our friends' insulters to chastize. 

Long may ye flourish thus, the prince replies. 
Strange transport seiz'd me as I pass'd along, 
To meet so many troops, and all so young, 
As if your army did of twins consist; 
Yet amongst them my late acquaintance miss'd: 
Ev'n all that to your palace did resort, 
When first you entertain'd me at your court; 
And cannot guess the cause from whence cou'd spring 
So vast a change- Then thus the sighing king: 

Illustrious guest, to my strange tale attend, 
Of sad beginning, but a joyful end: 
The whole to a vast history wou'd swell, 
I shall but half, and that confus'dly, tell. 
That race whom so deserv'dly you admir'd, 
Are all into their silent tombs retir'd: 
They fell; and falling, how they shook my state, 
Thought may conceive, but words can ne'er relate. 

A dreadful plague from angry Juno came, 
To scourge the land, that bore her rival's name; 
Before her fatal anger was reveal'd, 
And teeming malice lay as yet conceal'd, 
All remedies we try, all med'cines use, 
Which Nature cou'd supply, or art produce; 
Th' unconquer'd foe derides the vain design, 
And art, and Nature foil'd, declare the cause divine. 

At first we only felt th' oppressive weight 
Of gloomy clouds, then teeming with our fate, 
And lab'ring to discarge unactive heat: 
But ere four moons alternate changes knew, 
With deadly blasts the fatal South-wind blew, 
Infected all the air, and poison'd as it flew. 
Our fountains too a dire infection yield, 
For crowds of vipers creep along the field, 
And with polluted gore, and baneful steams, 
Taint all the lakes, and venom all the streams. 

The young disease with milder force began, 
And rag'd on birds, and beasts, excusing Man. 
The lab'ring oxen fall before the plow, 
Th' unhappy plow-men stare, and wonder how: 
The tabid sheep, with sickly bleatings, pines; 
Its wool decreasing, as its strength declines: 
The warlike steed, by inward foes compell'd, 
Neglects his honours, and deserts the field; 
Unnerv'd, and languid, seeks a base retreat, 
And at the manger groans, but wish'd a nobler fate: 
The stags forget their speed, the boars their rage, 
Nor can the bears the stronger herds engage: 
A gen'ral faintness does invade 'em all, 
And in the woods, and fields, promiscuously they fall. 
The air receives the stench, and (strange to say) 
The rav'nous birds and beasts avoid the prey: 
Th' offensive bodies rot upon the ground, 
And spread the dire contagion all around. 

But now the plague, grown to a larger size, 
Riots on Man, and scorns a meaner prize. 
Intestine heats begin the civil war, 
And flushings first the latent flame declare, 
And breath inspir'd, which seem'd like fiery air. 
Their black dry tongues are swell'd, and scarce can move,

And short thick sighs from panting lung are drove. 
They gape for air, with flatt'ring hopes t' abate 
Their raging flames, but that augments their heat. 
No bed, no cov'ring can the wretches bear, 
But on the ground, expos'd to open air, 
They lye, and hope to find a pleasing coolness there. 
The suff'ring Earth with that oppression curst, 
Returns the heat which they imparted first. 

In vain physicians would bestow their aid, 
Vain all their art, and useless all their trade; 
And they, ev'n they, who fleeting life recall, 
Feel the same Pow'rs, and undistinguish'd fall. 
If any proves so daring to attend 
His sick companion, or his darling friend, 
Th' officious wretch sucks in contagious breath, 
And with his friend does sympathize in death. 

And now the care and hopes of life are past, 
They please their fancies, and indulge their taste; 
At brooks and streams, regardless of their shame, 
Each sex, promiscuous, strives to quench their flame; 
Nor do they strive in vain to quench it there, 
For thirst, and life at once extinguish'd are. 
Thus in the brooks the dying bodies sink, 
But heedless still the rash survivors drink. 

So much uneasy down the wretches hate, 
They fly their beds, to struggle with their fate; 
But if decaying strength forbids to rise, 
The victim crawls and rouls, 'till on the ground he lies.

Each shuns his bed, as each wou'd shun his tomb, 
And thinks th' infection only lodg'd at home. 

Here one, with fainting steps, does slowly creep 
O'er heaps of dead, and strait augments the heap; 
Another, while his strength and tongue prevail'd, 
Bewails his friend, and falls himself bewail'd: 
This with imploring looks surveys the skies, 
The last dear office of his closing eyes, 
But finds the Heav'ns implacable, and dies. 

What now, ah! what employ'd my troubled mind? 
But only hopes my subjects' fate to find. 
What place soe'er my weeping eyes survey, 
There in lamented heaps the vulgar lay; 
As acorns scatter when the winds prevail, 
Or mellow fruit from shaken branches fall. 

You see that dome which rears its front so high: 
'Tis sacred to the monarch of the sky: 
How many there, with unregarded tears, 
And fruitless vows, sent up successless pray'rs? 
There fathers for expiring sons implor'd, 
And there the wife bewail'd her gasping lord; 
With pious off'rings they'd appease the skies, 
But they, ere yet th' attoning vapours rise, 
Before the altars fall, themselves a sacrifice: 
They fall, while yet their hands the gums contain, 
The gums surviving, but their off'rers slain. 

The destin'd ox, with holy garlands crown'd, 
Prevents the blow, and feels th' expected wound: 
When I my self invok'd the Pow'rs divine, 
To drive the fatal pest from me and mine; 
When now the priest with hands uplifted stood, 
Prepar'd to strike, and shed the sacred blood, 
The Gods themselves the mortal stroke bestow, 
The victim falls, but they impart the blow: 
Scarce was the knife with the pale purple stain'd, 
And no presages cou'd be then obtain'd, 
From putrid entrails, where th' infection reign'd. 

Death stalk'd around with such resistless sway, 
The temples of the Gods his force obey, 
And suppliants feel his stroke, while yet they pray. 
Go now, said he, your deities implore 
For fruitless aid, for I defie their pow'r. 
Then with a curst malicious joy survey'd 
The very altars, stain'd with trophies of the dead. 

The rest grown mad, and frantick with despair, 
Urge their own fate, and so prevent the fear. 
Strange madness that, when Death pursu'd so fast, 
T' anticipate the blow with impious haste. 

No decent honours to their urns are paid, 
Nor cou'd the graves receive the num'rous dead; 
For, or they lay unbury'd on the ground, 
Or unadorn'd a needy fun'ral found: 
All rev'rence past, the fainting wretches fight 
For fun'ral piles which were another's right. 

Unmourn'd they fall: for, who surviv'd to mourn? 
And sires, and mothers unlamented burn: 
Parents, and sons sustain an equal fate, 
And wand'ring ghosts their kindred shadows meet. 
The dead a larger space of ground require, 
Nor are the trees sufficient for the fire. 

Despairing under grief's oppressive weight, 
And sunk by these tempestuous blasts of Fate, 
O Jove, said I, if common fame says true, 
If e'er Aegina gave those joys to you, 
If e'er you lay enclos'd in her embrace, 
Fond of her charms, and eager to possess; 
O father, if you do not yet disclaim 
Paternal care, nor yet disown the name; 
Grant my petitions, and with speed restore 
My subjects num'rous as they were before, 
Or make me partner of the fate they bore. 
I spoke, and glorious lightning shone around, 
And ratling thunder gave a prosp'rous sound; 
So let it be, and may these omens prove 
A pledge, said I, of your returning love. 

By chance a rev'rend oak was near the place, 
Sacred to Jove, and of Dodona's race, 
Where frugal ants laid up their winter meat, 
Whose little bodies bear a mighty weight: 
We saw them march along, and hide their store, 
And much admir'd their number, and their pow'r; 
Admir'd at first, but after envy'd more. 
Full of amazement, thus to Jove I pray'd, 
O grant, since thus my subjects are decay'd, 
As many subjects to supply the dead. 
I pray'd, and strange convulsions mov'd the oak, 
Which murmur'd, tho' by ambient winds unshook: 
My trembling hands, and stiff-erected hair, 
Exprest all tokens of uncommon fear; 
Yet both the earth and sacred oak I kist, 
And scarce cou'd hope, yet still I hop'd the best; 
For wretches, whatsoe'er the Fates divine, 
Expound all omens to their own design. 

But now 'twas night, when ev'n distraction wears 
A pleasing look, and dreams beguile our cares, 
Lo! the same oak appears before my eyes, 
Nor alter'd in his shape, nor former size; 
As many ants the num'rous branches bear, 
The same their labour, and their frugal care; 
The branches too a like commotion sound, 
And shook th' industrious creatures on the ground, 
Who, by degrees (what's scarce to be believ'd) 
A nobler form, and larger bulk receiv'd, 
And on the earth walk'd an unusual pace, 
With manly strides, and an erected face- 
Their num'rous legs, and former colour lost, 
The insects cou'd a human figure boast. 

I wake, and waking find my cares again, 
And to the unperforming Gods complain, 
And call their promise, and pretences, vain. 
Yet in my court I heard the murm'ring voice 
Of strangers, and a mixt uncommon noise: 
But I suspected all was still a dream, 
'Till Telamon to my apartment came, 
Op'ning the door with an impetuous haste, 
O come, said he, and see your faith and hopes surpast: 
I follow, and, confus'd with wonder, view 
Those shapes which my presaging slumbers drew: 
I saw, and own'd, and call'd them subjects; they 
Confest my pow'r, submissive to my sway. 
To Jove, restorer of my race decay'd, 
My vows were first with due oblations paid, 
I then divide with an impartial hand 
My empty city, and my ruin'd land, 
To give the new-born youth an equal share, 
And call them Myrmidons, from what they were. 
You saw their persons, and they still retain 
The thrift of ants, tho' now transform'd to men. 
A frugal people, and inur'd to sweat, 
Lab'ring to gain, and keeping what they get. 
These, equal both in strength and years, shall join 
Their willing aid, and follow your design, 
With the first southern gale that shall present 
To fill your sails, and favour your intent. 

With such discourse they entertain the day; 
The ev'ning past in banquets, sport, and play: 
Then, having crown'd the night with sweet repose, 
Aurora (with the wind at east) arose. 
Now Pallas' sons to Cephalus resort, 
And Cephalus with Pallas' sons to court, 
To the king's levee; him sleep's silken chain, 
And pleasing dreams, beyond his hour detain; 
But then the princes of the blood, in state, 
Expect, and meet 'em at the palace gate. 

To th' inmost courts the Grecian youths were led, 
And plac'd by Phocus on a Tyrian bed; 
Who, soon observing Cephalus to hold 
A dart of unknown wood, but arm'd with gold: 
None better loves (said he) the huntsman's sport, 
Or does more often to the woods resort; 
Yet I that jav'lin's stem with wonder view, 
Too brown for box, too smooth a grain for yew. 
I cannot guess the tree; but never art 
Did form, or eyes behold so fair a dart! 
The guest then interrupts him- 'Twou'd produce 
Still greater wonder, if you knew its use. 
It never fails to strike the game, and then 
Comes bloody back into your hand again. 
Then Phocus each particular desires, 
And th' author of the wond'rous gift enquires. 
To which the owner thus, with weeping eyes, 
And sorrow for his wife's sad fate, replies, 
This weapon here (o prince!) can you believe 
This dart the cause for which so much I grieve; 
And shall continue to grieve on, 'till Fate 
Afford such wretched life no longer date. 
Would I this fatal gift had ne'er enjoy'd, 
This fatal gift my tender wife destroy'd: 
Procris her name, ally'd in charms and blood 
To fair Orythia courted by a God. 
Her father seal'd my hopes with rites divine, 
But firmer love before had made her mine. 
Men call'd me blest, and blest I was indeed. 
The second month our nuptials did succeed; 
When (as upon Hymettus' dewy head, 
For mountain stags my net betimes I spread) 
Aurora spy'd, and ravish'd me away, 
With rev'rence to the Goddess, I must say, 
Against my will, for Procris had my heart, 
Nor wou'd her image from my thoughts depart. 
At last, in rage she cry'd, Ingrateful boy 
Go to your Procris, take your fatal joy; 
And so dismiss'd me: musing, as I went, 
What those expressions of the Goddess meant, 
A thousand jealous fears possess me now, 
Lest Procris had prophan'd her nuptial vow: 
Her youth and charms did to my fancy paint 
A lewd adultress, but her life a saint. 
Yet I was absent long, the Goddess too 
Taught me how far a woman cou'd be true. 
Aurora's treatment much suspicion bred; 
Besides, who truly love, ev'n shadows dread. 
I strait impatient for the tryal grew, 
What courtship back'd with richest gifts cou'd do. 
Aurora's envy aided my design, 
And lent me features far unlike to mine. 
In this disguise to my own house I came, 
But all was chaste, no conscious sign of blame: 
With thousand arts I scarce admittance found, 
And then beheld her weeping on the ground 
For her lost husband; hardly I retain'd 
My purpose, scarce the wish'd embrace refrain'd. 
How charming was her grief! Then, Phocus, guess 
What killing beauties waited on her dress. 
Her constant answer, when my suit I prest, 
Forbear, my lord's dear image guards this breast; 
Where-e'er he is, whatever cause detains, 
Who-e'er has his, my heart unmov'd remains. 
What greater proofs of truth than these cou'd be? 
Yet I persist, and urge my destiny. 
At length, she found, when my own form return'd, 
Her jealous lover there, whose loss she mourn'd. 
Enrag'd with my suspicion, swift as wind, 
She fled at once from me and all mankind; 
And so became, her purpose to retain, 
A nymph, and huntress in Diana's train: 
Forsaken thus, I found my flames encrease, 
I own'd my folly, and I su'd for peace. 
It was a fault, but not of guilt, to move 
Such punishment, a fault of too much love. 
Thus I retriev'd her to my longing arms, 
And many happy days possess'd her charms. 
But with herself she kindly did confer, 
What gifts the Goddess had bestow'd on her; 
The fleetest grey-hound, with this lovely dart, 
And I of both have wonders to impart. 
Near Thebes a savage beast, of race unknown, 
Laid waste the field, and bore the vineyards down; 
The swains fled from him, and with one consent 
Our Grecian youth to chase the monster went; 
More swift than light'ning he the toils surpast, 
And in his course spears, men, and trees o'er-cast. 
We slipt our dogs, and last my Lelaps too, 
When none of all the mortal race wou'd do: 
He long before was struggling from my hands, 
And, e're we cou'd unloose him, broke his bands. 
That minute where he was, we cou'd not find, 
And only saw the dust he left behind. 
I climb'd a neighb'ring hill to view the chase, 
While in the plain they held an equal race; 
The savage now seems caught, and now by force 
To quit himself, nor holds the same strait course; 
But running counter, from the foe withdraws, 
And with short turning cheats his gaping jaws: 
Which he retrieves, and still so closely prest, 
You'd fear at ev'ry stretch he were possess'd; 
Yet for the gripe his fangs in vain prepare; 
The game shoots from him, and he chops the air. 
To cast my jav'lin then I took my stand; 
But as the thongs were fitting to my hand, 
While to the valley I o'er-look'd the wood, 
Before my eyes two marble statues stood; 
That, as pursu'd appearing at full stretch, 
This barking after, and at point to catch: 
Some God their course did with this wonder grace, 
That neither might be conquer'd in the chase. 
A sudden silence here his tongue supprest, 
He here stops short, and fain wou'd wave the rest. 

The eager prince then urg'd him to impart, 
The Fortune that attended on the dart. 
First then (said he) past joys let me relate, 
For bliss was the foundation of my fate. 
No language can those happy hours express, 
Did from our nuptials me, and Procris bless: 
The kindest pair! What more cou'd Heav'n confer? 
For she was all to me, and I to her. 
Had Jove made love, great Jove had been despis'd; 
And I my Procris more than Venus priz'd: 
Thus while no other joy we did aspire, 
We grew at last one soul, and one desire. 
Forth to the woods I went at break of day 
(The constant practice of my youth) for prey: 
Nor yet for servant, horse, or dog did call, 
I found this single dart to serve for all. 
With slaughter tir'd, I sought the cooler shade, 
And winds that from the mountains pierc'd the glade: 
Come, gentle air (so was I wont to say) 
Come, gentle air, sweet Aura come away. 
This always was the burden of my song, 
Come 'swage my flames, sweet Aura come along. 
Thou always art most welcome to my breast; 
I faint; approach, thou dearest, kindest guest! 
These blandishments, and more than these, I said 
(By Fate to unsuspected ruin led), 
Thou art my joy, for thy dear sake I love 
Each desart hill, and solitary grove; 
When (faint with labour) I refreshment need, 
For cordials on thy fragrant breath I feed. 
At last a wand'ring swain in hearing came, 
And cheated with the sound of Aura's name, 
He thought I some assignation made; 
And to my Procris' ear the news convey'd. 
Great love is soonest with suspicion fir'd: 
She swoon'd, and with the tale almost expir'd. 
Ah! wretched heart! (she cry'd) ah! faithless man. 
And then to curse th' imagin'd nymph began: 
Yet oft she doubts, oft hopes she is deceiv'd, 
And chides herself, that ever she believ'd 
Her lord to such injustice cou'd proceed, 
'Till she her self were witness of the deed. 
Next morn I to the woods again repair, 
And, weary with the chase, invoke the air: 
Approach, dear Aura, and my bosom chear: 
At which a mournful sound did strike my ear; 
Yet I proceeded, 'till the thicket by, 
With rustling noise and motion, drew my eye: 
I thought some beast of prey was shelter'd there, 
And to the covert threw my certain spear; 
From whence a tender sigh my soul did wound, 
Ah me! it cry'd, and did like Procris sound. 
Procris was there, too well the voice I knew, 
And to the place with headlong horror flew; 
Where I beheld her gasping on the ground, 
In vain attempting from the deadly wound 
To draw the dart, her love's dear fatal gift! 
My guilty arms had scarce the strength to lift 
The beauteous load; my silks, and hair I tore 
(If possible) to stanch the pressing gore; 
For pity beg'd her keep her flitting breath, 
And not to leave me guilty of her death. 
While I intreat she fainted fast away, 
And these few words had only strength to say: 
By all the sacred bonds of plighted love, 
By all your rev'rence to the Pow'rs above, 
By all the truth for which you held me dear, 
And last by love, the cause through which I bleed, 
Let Aura never to my bed succeed. 
I then perceiv'd the error of our fate, 
And told it her, but found and told too late! 
I felt her lower to my bosom fall, 
And while her eyes had any sight at all, 
On mine she fix'd them; in her pangs still prest 
My hand, and sigh'd her soul into my breast; 
Yet, being undeceiv'd, resign'd her breath 
Methought more chearfully, and smil'd in death. 

With such concern the weeping heroe told 
This tale, that none who heard him cou'd with-hold 
From melting into sympathizing tears, 
'Till Aeacus with his two sons appears; 
Whom he commits, with their new-levy'd bands, 
To Fortune's, and so brave a gen'ral's hands.  

Now shone the morning star in bright array, 
To vanquish night, and usher in the day: 
The wind veers southward, and moist clouds arise, 
That blot with shades the blue meridian skies. 
Cephalus feels with joy the kindly gales, 
His new allies unfurl the swelling sails; 
Steady their course, they cleave the yielding main, 
And, with a wish, th' intended harbour gain. 
Mean-while King Minos, on the Attick strand, 
Displays his martial skill, and wastes the land. 
His army lies encampt upon the plains, 
Before Alcathoe's walls, where Nisus reigns; 
On whose grey head a lock of purple hue, 
The strength, and fortune of his kingdom, grew. 

Six moons were gone, and past, when still from far 
Victoria hover'd o'er the doubtful war. 
So long, to both inclin'd, th' impartial maid 
Between 'em both her equal wings display'd. 
High on the walls, by Phoebus vocal made, 
A turret of the palace rais'd its head; 
And where the God his tuneful harp resign'd. 
The sound within the stones still lay enshrin'd: 
Hither the daughter of the purple king 
Ascended oft, to hear its musick ring; 
And, striking with a pebble, wou'd release 
Th' enchanted notes, in times of happy peace. 
But now, from thence, the curious maid beheld 
Rough feats of arms, and combats of the field: 
And, since the siege was long, had learnt the name 
Of ev'ry chief, his character, and fame; 
Their arms, their horse, and quiver she descry'd, 
Nor cou'd the dress of war the warriour hide. 

Europa's son she knew above the rest, 
And more, than well became a virgin breast: 
In vain the crested morion veils his face, 
She thinks it adds a more peculiar grace: 
His ample shield, embost with burnish'd gold, 
Still makes the bearer lovelier to behold: 
When the tough jav'lin, with a whirl, he sends, 
His strength and skill the sighing maid commends; 
Or, when he strains to draw the circling bow, 
And his fine limbs a manly posture show, 
Compar'd with Phoebus, he performs so well, 
Let her be judge, and Minos shall excell. 

But when the helm put off, display'd to sight, 
And set his features in an open light; 
When, vaulting to his seat, his steed he prest, 
Caparison'd in gold, and richly drest; 
Himself in scarlet sumptuously array'd, 
New passions rise, and fire the frantick maid. 
O happy spear! she cries, that feels his touch; 
Nay, ev'n the reins he holds are blest too much. 
Oh! were it lawful, she cou'd wing her way 
Thro' the stern hostile troops without dismay; 
Or throw her body to the distant ground, 
And in the Cretans happy camp be found. 
Wou'd Minos but desire it! she'd expose 
Her native country to her country's foes; 
Unbar the gates, the town with flames infest, 
Or any thing that Minos shou'd request. 

And as she sate, and pleas'd her longing sight, 
Viewing the king's pavilion veil'd with white, 
Shou'd joy, or grief, she said, possess my breast, 
To see my country by a war opprest? 
I'm in suspense! For, tho' 'tis grief to know 
I love a man that is declar'd my foe; 
Yet, in my own despite, I must approve 
That lucky war, which brought the man I love. 
Yet, were I tender'd as a pledge of peace, 
The cruelties of war might quickly cease. 
Oh! with what joy I'd wear the chains he gave! 
A patient hostage, and a willing slave. 
Thou lovely object! if the nymph that bare 
Thy charming person, were but half so fair; 
Well might a God her virgin bloom desire, 
And with a rape indulge his amorous fire. 
Oh! had I wings to glide along the air, 
To his dear tent I'd fly, and settle there: 
There tell my quality, confess my flame, 
And grant him any dowry that he'd name. 
All, all I'd give; only my native land, 
My dearest country, shou'd excepted stand, 
For, perish love, and all expected joys, 
E're, with so base a thought, my soul complies. 
Yet, oft the vanquish'd some advantage find, 
When conquer'd by a noble, gen'rous mind. 
Brave Minos justly has the war begun, 
Fir'd with resentment for his murder'd son: 
The righteous Gods a righteous cause regard, 
And will, with victory, his arms reward: 
We must be conquer'd; and the captive's fate 
Will surely seize us, tho' it seize us late. 
Why then shou'd love be idle, and neglect 
What Mars, by arms and perils, will effect? 
Oh! Prince, I dye, with anxious fear opprest, 
Lest some rash hand shou'd wound my charmer's breast: 
For, if they saw, no barb'rous mind cou'd dare 
Against that lovely form to raise a spear. 

But I'm resolv'd, and fix'd in this decree, 
My father's country shall my dowry be. 
Thus I prevent the loss of life and blood, 
And, in effect, the action must be good. 
Vain resolution! for, at ev'ry gate 
The trusty centinels, successive, wait: 
The keys my father keeps; ah! there's my grief; 
'Tis he obstructs all hopes of my relief. 
Gods! that this hated light I'd never seen! 
Or, all my life, without a father been! 
But Gods we all may be; for those that dare, 
Are Gods, and Fortune's chiefest favours share. 
The ruling Pow'rs a lazy pray'r detest, 
The bold adventurer succeeds the best. 
What other maid, inspir'd with such a flame, 
But wou'd take courage, and abandon shame? 
But wou'd, tho' ruin shou'd ensue, remove 
Whate'er oppos'd, and clear the way to love? 
This, shall another's feeble passion dare? 
While I sit tame, and languish in despair: 
No; for tho' fire and sword before me lay, 
Impatient love thro' both shou'd force its way. 
Yet I have no such enemies to fear, 
My sole obstruction is my father's hair; 
His purple lock my sanguine hope destroys, 
And clouds the prospect of my rising joys. 

Whilst thus she spoke, amid the thick'ning air 
Night supervenes, the greatest nurse of care: 
And, as the Goddess spreads her sable wings, 
The virgin's fears decay, and courage springs. 
The hour was come, when Man's o'er-labour'd breast 
Surceas'd its care, by downy sleep possest: 
All things now hush'd, Scylla with silent tread 
Urg'd her approach to Nisus' royal bed: 
There, of the fatal lock (accursed theft!) 
She her unwitting father's head bereft. 
In safe possession of her impious prey, 
Out at a postern gate she takes her way. 
Embolden'd, by the merit of the deed 
She traverses the adverse camp with speed, 
'Till Minos' tent she reach'd: the righteous king 
She thus bespoke, who shiver'd at the thing. 

Behold th' effect of love's resistless sway! 
I, Nisus' royal seed, to thee betray 
My country, and my Gods. For this strange task, 
Minos, no other boon but thee I ask. 
This purple lock, a pledge of love, receive; 
No worthless present, since in it I give 
My father's head.- Mov'd at a crime so new, 
And with abhorrence fill'd, back Minos drew, 
Nor touch'd th' unhallow'd gift; but thus exclaim'd 
(With mein indignant, and with eyes inflam'd), 
Perdition seize thee, thou, thy kind's disgrace! 
May thy devoted carcass find no place 
In earth, or air, or sea, by all out-cast! 
Shall Minos, with so foul a monster, blast 
His Cretan world, where cradled Jove was nurst? 
Forbid it Heav'n!- away, thou most accurst! 

And now Alcathoe, its lord exchang'd, 
Was under Minos' domination rang'd. 
While the most equal king his care applies 
To curb the conquer'd, and new laws devise, 
The fleet, by his command, with hoisted sails, 
And ready oars, invites the murm'ring gales. 
At length the Cretan hero anchor weigh'd, 
Repaying, with neglect, th' abandon'd maid. 
Deaf to her cries, he furrows up the main: 
In vain she prays, sollicits him in vain. 

And now she furious grows in wild despair, 
She wrings her hands, and throws aloft her hair. 
Where run'st thou? (thus she vents her deep distress) 
Why shun'st thou her that crown'd thee with success? 
Her, whose fond love to thee cou'd sacrifice 
Her country, and her parent, sacred ties! 
Can nor my love, nor proffer'd presents find 
A passage to thy heart, and make thee kind? 
Can nothing move thy pity? O ingrate, 
Can'st thou behold my lost, forlorn estate, 
And not be soften'd? Can'st thou throw off one 
Who has no refuge left but thee alone? 
Where shall I seek for comfort? whither fly? 
My native country does in ashes lye: 
Or were't not so, my treason bars me there, 
And bids me wander. Shall I next repair 
To a wrong'd father, by my guilt undone?- 
Me all Mankind deservedly will shun. 
I, out of all the world, my self have thrown, 
To purchase an access to Crete alone; 
Which, since refus'd, ungen'rous man, give o'er 
To boast thy race; Europa never bore 
A thing so savage. Thee some tygress bred, 
On the bleak Syrt's inhospitable bed; 
Or where Charybdis pours its rapid tide 
Tempestuous. Thou art not to Jove ally'd; 
Nor did the king of Gods thy mother meet 
Beneath a bull's forg'd shape, and bear to Crete. 
That fable of thy glorious birth is feign'd; 
Some wild outrageous bull thy dam sustain'd. 
O father Nisus, now my death behold; 
Exult, o city, by my baseness sold: 
Minos, obdurate, has aveng'd ye all; 
But 'twere more just by those I wrong'd to fall: 
For why shou'dst thou, who only didst subdue 
By my offending, my offence pursue? 
Well art thou matcht to one whose am'rous flame 
Too fiercely rag'd, for human-kind to tame; 
One who, within a wooden heifer thrust, 
Courted a low'ring bull's mistaken lust; 
And, from whose monster-teeming womb, the Earth 
Receiv'd, what much it mourn'd, a bi-form birth. 
But what avails my plaints? the whistling wind, 
Which bears him far away, leaves them behind. 
Well weigh'd Pasiphae, when she prefer'd 
A bull to thee, more brutish than the herd. 
But ah! Time presses, and the labour'd oars 
To distance drive the fleet, and lose the less'ning shores.

Think not, ungrateful man, the liquid way 
And threat'ning billows shall inforce my stay. 
I'll follow thee in spite: My arms I'll throw 
Around thy oars, or grasp thy crooked prow, 
And drag thro' drenching seas. Her eager tongue 
Had hardly clos'd the speech, when forth she sprung 
And prov'd the deep. Cupid with added force 
Recruits each nerve, and aids her wat'ry course. 
Soon she the ship attains, unwelcome guest; 
And, as with close embrace its sides she prest, 
A hawk from upper air came pouring down 
('Twas Nisus cleft the sky with wings new grown). 
At Scylla's head his horny bill he aims; 
She, fearful of the blow, the ship disclaims, 
Quitting her hold: and yet she fell not far, 
But wond'ring, finds her self sustain'd in air. 
Chang'd to a lark, she mottled pinions shook, 
And, from the ravish'd lock, the name of Ciris took. 

Now Minos, landed on the Cretan shore, 
Performs his vows to Jove's protecting pow'r; 
A hundred bullocks of the largest breed, 
With flowrets crown'd, before his altar bleed: 
While trophies of the vanquish'd, brought from far 
Adorn the palace with the spoils of war. 

Mean-while the monster of a human-beast, 
His family's reproach, and stain, increas'd. 
His double kind the rumour swiftly spread, 
And evidenc'd the mother's beastly deed. 
When Minos, willing to conceal the shame 
That sprung from the reports of tatling Fame, 
Resolves a dark inclosure to provide, 
And, far from sight, the two-form'd creature hide. 

Great Daedalus of Athens was the man 
That made the draught, and form'd the wondrous plan; 
Where rooms within themselves encircled lye, 
With various windings, to deceive the eye. 
As soft Maeander's wanton current plays, 
When thro' the Phrygian fields it loosely strays; 
Backward and forward rouls the dimpl'd tide, 
Seeming, at once, two different ways to glide: 
While circling streams their former banks survey, 
And waters past succeeding waters see: 
Now floating to the sea with downward course, 
Now pointing upward to its ancient source, 
Such was the work, so intricate the place, 
That scarce the workman all its turns cou'd trace; 
And Daedalus was puzzled how to find 
The secret ways of what himself design'd. 

These private walls the Minotaur include, 
Who twice was glutted with Athenian blood: 
But the third tribute more successful prov'd, 
Slew the foul monster, and the plague remov'd. 
When Theseus, aided by the virgin's art, 
Had trac'd the guiding thread thro' ev'ry part, 
He took the gentle maid, that set him free, 
And, bound for Dias, cut the briny sea. 
There, quickly cloy'd, ungrateful, and unkind, 
Left his fair consort in the isle behind, 
Whom Bacchus saw, and straining in his arms 
Her rifled bloom, and violated charms, 
Resolves, for this, the dear engaging dame 
Shou'd shine for ever in the rolls of Fame; 
And bids her crown among the stars be plac'd, 
With an eternal constellation grac'd. 
The golden circlet mounts; and, as it flies, 
Its diamonds twinkle in the distant skies; 
There, in their pristin form, the gemmy rays 
Between Alcides, and the dragon blaze. 

In tedious exile now too long detain'd, 
Daedalus languish'd for his native land: 
The sea foreclos'd his flight; yet thus he said: 
Tho' Earth and water in subjection laid, 
O cruel Minos, thy dominion be, 
We'll go thro' air; for sure the air is free. 
Then to new arts his cunning thought applies, 
And to improve the work of Nature tries. 
A row of quils in gradual order plac'd, 
Rise by degrees in length from first to last; 
As on a cliff th' ascending thicket grows, 
Or, different reeds the rural pipe compose. 
Along the middle runs a twine of flax, 
The bottom stems are joyn'd by pliant wax. 
Thus, well compact, a hollow bending brings 
The fine composure into real wings. 

His boy, young Icarus, that near him stood, 
Unthinking of his fate, with smiles pursu'd 
The floating feathers, which the moving air 
Bore loosely from the ground, and wasted here and there.

Or with the wax impertinently play'd, 
And with his childish tricks the great design delay'd. 

The final master-stroke at last impos'd, 
And now, the neat machine compleatly clos'd; 
Fitting his pinions on, a flight he tries, 
And hung self-ballanc'd in the beaten skies. 
Then thus instructs his child: My boy, take care 
To wing your course along the middle air; 
If low, the surges wet your flagging plumes; 
If high, the sun the melting wax consumes: 
Steer between both: nor to the northern skies, 
Nor south Orion turn your giddy eyes; 
But follow me: let me before you lay 
Rules for the flight, and mark the pathless way. 
Then teaching, with a fond concern, his son, 
He took the untry'd wings, and fix'd 'em on; 
But fix'd with trembling hands; and as he speaks, 
The tears roul gently down his aged cheeks. 
Then kiss'd, and in his arms embrac'd him fast, 
But knew not this embrace must be the last. 
And mounting upward, as he wings his flight, 
Back on his charge he turns his aking sight; 
As parent birds, when first their callow care 
Leave the high nest to tempt the liquid air. 
Then chears him on, and oft, with fatal art, 
Reminds the stripling to perform his part. 

These, as the angler at the silent brook, 
Or mountain-shepherd leaning on his crook, 
Or gaping plowman, from the vale descries, 
They stare, and view 'em with religious eyes, 
And strait conclude 'em Gods; since none, but they, 
Thro' their own azure skies cou'd find a way. 

Now Delos, Paros on the left are seen, 
And Samos, favour'd by Jove's haughty queen; 
Upon the right, the isle Lebynthos nam'd, 
And fair Calymne for its honey fam'd. 
When now the boy, whose childish thoughts aspire 
To loftier aims, and make him ramble high'r, 
Grown wild, and wanton, more embolden'd flies 
Far from his guide, and soars among the skies. 
The soft'ning wax, that felt a nearer sun, 
Dissolv'd apace, and soon began to run. 
The youth in vain his melting pinions shakes, 
His feathers gone, no longer air he takes: 
Oh! Father, father, as he strove to cry, 
Down to the sea he tumbled from on high, 
And found his Fate; yet still subsists by fame, 
Among those waters that retain his name. 

The father, now no more a father, cries, 
Ho Icarus! where are you? as he flies; 
Where shall I seek my boy? he cries again, 
And saw his feathers scatter'd on the main. 
Then curs'd his art; and fun'ral rites confer'd, 
Naming the country from the youth interr'd. 

A partridge, from a neighb'ring stump, beheld 
The sire his monumental marble build; 
Who, with peculiar call, and flutt'ring wing, 
Chirpt joyful, and malicious seem'd to sing: 
The only bird of all its kind, and late 
Transform'd in pity to a feather'd state: 
From whence, O Daedalus, thy guilt we date. 

His sister's son, when now twelve years were past, 
Was, with his uncle, as a scholar plac'd; 
The unsuspecting mother saw his parts, 
And genius fitted for the finest arts. 
This soon appear'd; for when the spiny bone 
In fishes' backs was by the stripling known, 
A rare invention thence he learnt to draw, 
Fil'd teeth in ir'n, and made the grating saw. 
He was the first, that from a knob of brass 
Made two strait arms with widening stretch to pass; 
That, while one stood upon the center's place, 
The other round it drew a circling space. 
Daedalus envy'd this, and from the top 
Of fair Minerva's temple let him drop; 
Feigning, that, as he lean'd upon the tow'r, 
Careless he stoop'd too much, and tumbled o'er. 

The Goddess, who th' ingenious still befriends, 
On this occasion her asssistance lends; 
His arms with feathers, as he fell, she veils, 
And in the air a new made bird he sails. 
The quickness of his genius, once so fleet, 
Still in his wings remains, and in his feet: 
Still, tho' transform'd, his ancient name he keeps, 
And with low flight the new-shorn stubble sweeps, 
Declines the lofty trees, and thinks it best 
To brood in hedge-rows o'er its humble nest; 
And, in remembrance of the former ill, 
Avoids the heights, and precipices still. 

At length, fatigu'd with long laborious flights, 
On fair Sicilia's plains the artist lights; 
Where Cocalus the king, that gave him aid, 
Was, for his kindness, with esteem repaid. 
Athens no more her doleful tribute sent, 
That hardship gallant Theseus did prevent; 
Their temples hung with garlands, they adore 
Each friendly God, but most Minerva's pow'r: 
To her, to Jove, to all, their altars smoak, 
They each with victims, and perfumes invoke. 

Now talking Fame, thro' every Grecian town, 
Had spread, immortal Theseus, thy renown. 
From him the neighb'ring nations in distress, 
In suppliant terms implore a kind redress. 

From him the Caledonians sought relief; 
Though valiant Meleagros was their chief. 
The cause, a boar, who ravag'd far and near: 
Of Cynthia's wrath, th' avenging minister. 
For Oeneus with autumnal plenty bless'd, 
By gifts to Heav'n his gratitude express'd: 
Cull'd sheafs, to Ceres; to Lyaeus, wine; 
To Pan, and Pales, offer'd sheep and kine; 
And fat of olives, to Minerva's shrine. 
Beginning from the rural Gods, his hand 
Was lib'ral to the Pow'rs of high command: 
Each deity in ev'ry kind was bless'd, 
'Till at Diana's fane th' invidious honour ceas'd. 

Wrath touches ev'n the Gods; the Queen of Night, 
Fir'd with disdain, and jealous of her right, 
Unhonour'd though I am, at least, said she, 
Not unreveng'd that impious act shall be. 
Swift as the word, she sped the boar away, 
With charge on those devoted fields to prey. 
No larger bulls th' Aegyptian pastures feed, 
And none so large Sicilian meadows breed: 
His eye-balls glare with fire suffus'd with blood; 
His neck shoots up a thick-set thorny wood; 
His bristled back a trench impal'd appears, 
And stands erected, like a field of spears; 
Froth fills his chaps, he sends a grunting sound, 
And part he churns, and part befoams the ground, 
For tusks with Indian elephants he strove, 
And Jove's own thunder from his mouth he drove. 
He burns the leaves; the scorching blast invades 
The tender corn, and shrivels up the blades: 
Or suff'ring not their yellow beards to rear, 
He tramples down the spikes, and intercepts the year: 
In vain the barns expect their promis'd load, 
Nor barns at home, nor recks are heap'd abroad: 
In vain the hinds the threshing-floor prepare, 
And exercise their flail in empty air. 
With olives ever-green the ground is strow'd, 
And grapes ungather'd shed their gen'rous blood. 
Amid the fold he rages, nor the sheep 
Their shepherds, nor the grooms their bulls can keep. 

From fields to walls the frighted rabble run, 
Nor think themselves secure within the town: 
'Till Meleagros, and his chosen crew, 
Contemn the danger, and the praise pursue. 
Fair Leda's twins (in time to stars decreed) 
One fought on foot, one curb'd the fiery steed; 
Then issu'd forth fam'd Jason after these, 
Who mann'd the foremost ship that sail'd the seas; 
Then Theseus join'd with bold Perithous came; 
A single concord in a double name: 
The Thestian sons, Idas who swiftly ran, 
And Ceneus, once a woman, now a man. 
Lynceus, with eagle's eyes, and lion's heart; 
Leucippus, with his never-erring dart; 
Acastus, Phileus, Phoenix, Telamon, 
Echion, Lelix, and Eurytion, 
Achilles' father, and great Phocus' son; 
Dryas the fierce, and Hippasus the strong; 
With twice old Iolas, and Nestor then but young. 
Laertes active, and Ancaeus bold; 
Mopsus the sage, who future things foretold; 
And t' other seer, yet by his wife unsold. 
A thousand others of immortal fame; 
Among the rest, fair Atalanta came, 
Grace of the woods: a diamond buckle bound 
Her vest behind, that else had flow'd upon the ground, 
And shew'd her buskin'd legs; her head was bare, 
But for her native ornament of hair; 
Which in a simple knot was ty'd above, 
Sweet negligence! unheeded bait of love! 
Her sounding quiver, on her shoulder ty'd, 
One hand a dart, and one a bow supply'd. 
Such was her face, as in a nymph display'd 
A fair fierce boy, or in a boy betray'd 
The blushing beauties of a modest maid. 
The Caledonian chief at once the dame 
Beheld, at once his heart receiv'd the flame, 
With Heav'ns averse. O happy youth, he cry'd; 
For whom thy fates reserve so fair a bride! 
He sigh'd, and had no leisure more to say; 
His honour call'd his eyes another way, 
And forc'd him to pursue the now-neglected prey. 

There stood a forest on a mountain's brow, 
Which over-look'd the shaded plains below. 
No sounding ax presum'd those trees to bite; 
Coeval with the world, a venerable sight. 
The heroes there arriv'd, some spread around 
The toils; some search the footsteps on the ground: 
Some from the chains the faithful dogs unbound. 
Of action eager, and intent in thought, 
The chiefs their honourable danger sought: 
A valley stood below; the common drain 
Of waters from above, and falling rain: 
The bottom was a moist, and marshy ground, 
Whose edges were with bending oziers crown'd: 
The knotty bulrush next in order stood, 
And all within of reeds a trembling wood. 

From hence the boar was rous'd, and sprung amain, 
Like lightning sudden, on the warrior train; 
Beats down the trees before him, shakes the ground. 
The forest echoes to the crackling sound; 
Shout the fierce youth, and clamours ring around. 
All stood with their protended spears prepar'd, 
With broad steel heads the brandish'd weapons glar'd. 
The beast impetuous with his tusks aside 
Deals glancing wounds; the fearful dogs divide: 
All spend their mouths aloof, but none abide. 
Echion threw the first, but miss'd his mark, 
And stuck his boar-spear on a maple's bark. 
Then Jason; and his javelin seem'd to take, 
But fail'd with over-force, and whiz'd above his back. 
Mopsus was next; but e'er he threw, address'd 
To Phoebus, thus: O patron, help thy priest: 
If I adore, and ever have ador'd 
Thy pow'r divine, thy present aid afford; 
That I may reach the beast. The God allow'd 
His pray'r, and smiling, gave him what he cou'd: 
He reach'd the savage, but no blood he drew: 
Dian unarm'd the javelin, as it flew. 

This chaf'd the boar, his nostrils flames expire, 
And his red eye-balls roul with living fire. 
Whirl'd from a sling, or from an engine thrown, 
Amid the foes, so flies a mighty stone, 
As flew the beast: the left wing put to flight, 
The chiefs o'er-born, he rushes on the right. 
Eupalamos and Pelagon he laid 
In dust, and next to death, but for their fellows' aid. 
Onesimus far'd worse, prepar'd to fly, 
The fatal fang drove deep within his thigh, 
And cut the nerves: the nerves no more sustain 
The bulk; the bulk unprop'd, falls headlong on the plain.

Nestor had fail'd the fall of Troy to see, 
But leaning on his lance, he vaulted on a tree; 
Then gath'ring up his feet, look'd down with fear, 
And thought his monstrous foe was still too near. 
Against a stump his tusk the monster grinds, 
And in the sharpen'd edge new vigour finds; 
Then, trusting to his arms, young Othrys found, 
And ranch'd his hips with one continu'd wound. 

Now Leda's twins, the future stars, appear; 
White were their habits, white their horses were: 
Conspicuous both, and both in act to throw, 
Their trembling lances brandish'd at the foe: 
Nor had they miss'd; but he to thickets fled, 
Conceal'd from aiming spears, not pervious to the steed.

But Telamon rush'd in, and happ'd to meet 
A rising root, that held his fastned feet; 
So down he fell, whom, sprawling on the ground, 
His brother from the wooden gyves unbound. 

Mean-time the virgin-huntress was not slow 
T' expel the shaft from her contracted bow: 
Beneath his ear the fastned arrow stood, 
And from the wound appear'd the trickling blood. 
She blush'd for joy: but Meleagros rais'd 
His voice with loud applause, and the fair archer prais'd.

He was the first to see, and first to show 
His friends the marks of the successful blow. 
Nor shall thy valour want the praises due, 
He said; a virtuous envy seiz'd the crew. 
They shout; the shouting animates their hearts, 
And all at once employ their thronging darts: 
But out of order thrown, in air they joyn, 
And multitude makes frustrate the design. 
With both his hands the proud Ancaeus takes, 
And flourishes his double-biting ax: 
Then, forward to his fate, he took a stride 
Before the rest, and to his fellows cry'd, 
Give place, and mark the diff'rence, if you can, 
Between a woman warrior, and a man, 
The boar is doom'd; nor though Diana lend 
Her aid, Diana can her beast defend. 
Thus boasted he; then stretch'd, on tiptoe stood, 
Secure to make his empty promise good. 
But the more wary beast prevents the blow, 
And upward rips the groin of his audacious foe. 
Ancaeus falls; his bowels from the wound 
Rush out, and clotted blood distains the ground. 

Perithous, no small portion of the war, 
Press'd on, and shook his lance: to whom from far 
Thus Theseus cry'd; O stay, my better part, 
My more than mistress; of my heart, the heart. 
The strong may fight aloof; Ancaeus try'd 
His force too near, and by presuming dy'd: 
He said, and while he spake his javelin threw, 
Hissing in air th' unerring weapon flew; 
But on an arm of oak, that stood betwixt 
The marks-man and the mark, his lance he fixt. 

Once more bold Jason threw, but fail'd to wound 
The boar, and slew an undeserving hound, 
And thro' the dog the dart was nail'd to ground. 

Two spears from Meleager's hand were sent, 
With equal force, but various in th' event: 
The first was fix'd in earth, the second stood 
On the boar's bristled back, and deeply drank his blood.

Now while the tortur'd savage turns around, 
And flings about his foam, impatient of the wound, 
The wound's great author close at hand provokes 
His rage, and plies him with redoubled strokes; 
Wheels, as he wheels; and with his pointed dart 
Explores the nearest passage to his heart. 
Quick, and more quick he spins in giddy gires, 
Then falls, and in much foam his soul expires. 
This act with shouts heav'n-high the friendly band 
Applaud, and strain in theirs the victor's hand. 
Then all approach the slain with vast surprize, 
Admire on what a breadth of earth he lies, 
And scarce secure, reach out their spears afar, 
And blood their points, to prove their partnership of war.

But he, the conqu'ring chief, his foot impress'd 
On the strong neck of that destructive beast; 
And gazing on the nymph with ardent eyes, 
Accept, said he, fair Nonacrine, my prize, 
And, though inferior, suffer me to join 
My labours, and my part of praise, with thine: 
At this presents her with the tusky head 
And chine, with rising bristles roughly spread. 
Glad she receiv'd the gift; and seem'd to take 
With double pleasure, for the giver's sake. 
The rest were seiz'd with sullen discontent, 
And a deaf murmur through the squadron went: 
All envy'd; but the Thestyan brethren show'd 
The least respect, and thus they vent their spleen aloud:

Lay down those honour'd spoils, nor think to share, 
Weak woman as thou art, the prize of war: 
Ours is the title, thine a foreign claim, 
Since Meleagrus from our lineage came. 
Trust not thy beauty; but restore the prize, 
Which he, besotted on that face, and eyes, 
Would rend from us: at this, enflam'd with spite, 
From her they snatch the gift, from him the giver's right.

But soon th' impatient prince his fauchion drew, 
And cry'd, Ye robbers of another's due, 
Now learn the diff'rence, at your proper cost, 
Betwixt true valour, and an empty boast. 
At this advanc'd, and sudden as the word, 
In proud Plexippus' bosom plung'd the sword: 
Toxeus amaz'd, and with amazement slow, 
Or to revenge, or ward the coming blow, 
Stood doubting; and while doubting thus he stood, 
Receiv'd the steel bath'd in his brother's blood. 

Pleas'd with the first, unknown the second news; 
Althaea to the temples pays their dues 
For her son's conquest; when at length appear 
Her grisly brethren stretch'd upon the bier: 
Pale at the sudden sight, she chang'd her cheer, 
And with her cheer her robes; but hearing tell 
The cause, the manner, and by whom they fell, 
'Twas grief no more, or grief and rage were one 
Within her soul; at last 'twas rage alone; 
Which burning upwards in succession, dries 
The tears, that stood consid'ring in her eyes. 

There lay a log unlighted on the hearth, 
When she was lab'ring in the throws of birth 
For th' unborn chief; the fatal sisters came, 
And rais'd it up, and toss'd it on the flame: 
Then on the rock a scanty measure place 
Of vital flax, and turn'd the wheel apace; 
And turning sung, To this red brand and thee, 
O new born babe, we give an equal destiny; 
So vanish'd out of view. The frighted dame 
Sprung hasty from her bed, and quench'd the flame: 
The log, in secret lock'd, she kept with care, 
And that, while thus preserv'd, preserv'd her heir. 
This brand she now produc'd; and first she strows 
The hearth with heaps of chips, and after blows; 
Thrice heav'd her hand, and heav'd, she thrice repress'd:

The sister and the mother long contest, 
Two doubtful titles, in one tender breast: 
And now her eyes, and cheeks with fury glow, 
Now pale her cheeks, her eyes with pity flow: 
Now low'ring looks presage approaching storms, 
And now prevailing love her face reforms: 
Resolv'd, she doubts again; the tears she dry'd 
With burning rage, are by new tears supply'd; 
And as a ship, which winds and waves assail 
Now with the current drives, now with the gale, 
Both opposite, and neither long prevail: 
She feels a double force, by turns obeys 
Th' imperious tempest, and th' impetuous seas: 
So fares Althaea's mind, she first relents 
With pity, of that pity then repents: 
Sister, and mother long the scales divide, 
But the beam nodded on the sister's side. 
Sometimes she softly sigh'd, then roar'd aloud; 
But sighs were stifled in the cries of blood. 

The pious, impious wretch at length decreed, 
To please her brothers' ghost, her son should bleed: 
And when the fun'ral flames began to rise, 
Receive, she said, a sister's sacrifice; 
A mother's bowels burn: high in her hand, 
Thus while she spoke, she held the fatal brand; 
Then thrice before the kindled pile she bow'd, 
And the three Furies thrice invok'd aloud: 
Come, come, revenging sisters, come, and view 
A sister paying her dead brothers due: 
A crime I punish, and a crime commit; 
But blood for blood, and death for death is fit: 
Great crimes must be with greater crimes repaid, 
And second fun'rals on the former laid. 
Let the whole houshold in one ruin fall, 
And may Diana's curse o'ertake us all. 
Shall Fate to happy Oenus still allow 
One son, while Thestius stands depriv'd of two? 
Better three lost, than one unpunish'd go. 
Take then, dear ghosts (while yet admitted new 
In Hell you wait my duty), take your due: 
A costly off'ring on your tomb is laid, 
When with my blood the price of yours is paid. 

Ah! whither am I hurry'd? Ah! forgive, 
Ye shades, and let your sister's issue live; 
A mother cannot give him death; tho' he 
Deserves it, he deserves it not from me. 

Then shall th' unpunish'd wretch insult the slain, 
Triumphant live, nor only live, but reign? 
While you, thin shades, the sport of winds, are tost 
O'er dreary plains, or tread the burning coast. 
I cannot, cannot bear; 'tis past, 'tis done; 
Perish this impious, this detested son: 
Perish his sire, and perish I withal; 
And let the house's heir, and the hop'd kingdom fall. 

Where is the mother fled, her pious love, 
And where the pains with which ten months I strove! 
Ah! had'st thou dy'd, my son, in infant years, 
Thy little herse had been bedew'd with tears. 

Thou liv'st by me; to me thy breath resign; 
Mine is the merit, the demerit thine. 
Thy life by double title I require; 
Once giv'n at birth, and once preserv'd from fire: 
One murder pay, or add one murder more, 
And me to them who fell by thee restore. 

I would, but cannot: my son's image stands 
Before my sight; and now their angry hands 
My brothers hold, and vengeance these exact; 
This pleads compassion, and repents the fact. 

He pleads in vain, and I pronounce his doom: 
My brothers, though unjustly, shall o'ercome. 
But having paid their injur'd ghosts their due, 
My son requires my death, and mine shall his pursue. 

At this, for the last time, she lifts her hand, 
Averts her eyes, and, half unwilling, drops the brand. 
The brand, amid the flaming fewel thrown, 
Or drew, or seem'd to draw, a dying groan; 
The fires themselves but faintly lick'd their prey, 
Then loath'd their impious food, and would have shrunk away.

Just then the heroe cast a doleful cry, 
And in those absent flames began to fry: 
The blind contagion rag'd within his veins; 
But he with manly patience bore his pains: 
He fear'd not Fate, but only griev'd to die 
Without an honest wound, and by a death so dry. 
Happy Ancaeus, thrice aloud he cry'd, 
With what becoming fate in arms he dy'd! 
Then call'd his brothers, sisters, sire around, 
And, her to whom his nuptial vows were bound, 
Perhaps his mother; a long sigh she drew, 
And his voice failing, took his last adieu. 
For as the flames augment, and as they stay 
At their full height, then languish to decay, 
They rise and sink by fits; at last they soar 
In one bright blaze, and then descend no more: 
Just so his inward heats, at height, impair, 
'Till the last burning breath shoots out the soul in air.

Now lofty Calidon in ruins lies; 
All ages, all degrees unsluice their eyes, 
And Heav'n, and Earth resound with murmurs, groans, and cries.

Matrons and maidens beat their breasts, and tear 
Their habits, and root up their scatter'd hair: 
The wretched father, father now no more, 
With sorrow sunk, lies prostrate on the floor, 
Deforms his hoary locks with dust obscene, 
And curses age, and loaths a life prolong'd with pain. 
By steel her stubborn soul his mother freed, 
And punish'd on her self her impious deed. 

Had I a hundred tongues, a wit so large 
As could their hundred offices discharge; 
Had Phoebus all his Helicon bestow'd 
In all the streams, inspiring all the God; 
Those tongues, that wit, those streams, that God in vain

Would offer to describe his sisters' pain: 
They beat their breasts with many a bruizing blow, 
'Till they turn livid, and corrupt the snow. 
The corps they cherish, while the corps remains, 
And exercise, and rub with fruitless pains; 
And when to fun'ral flames 'tis born away, 
They kiss the bed on which the body lay: 
And when those fun'ral flames no longer burn 
(The dust compos'd within a pious urn), 
Ev'n in that urn their brother they confess, 
And hug it in their arms, and to their bosoms press. 

His tomb is rais'd; then, stretch'd along the ground, 
Those living monuments his tomb surround: 
Ev'n to his name, inscrib'd, their tears they pay, 
'Till tears, and kisses wear his name away. 

But Cynthia now had all her fury spent, 
Not with less ruin than a race content: 
Excepting Gorge, perish'd all the seed, 
And her whom Heav'n for Hercules decreed. 
Satiate at last, no longer she pursu'd 
The weeping sisters; but With Wings endu'd, 
And horny beaks, and sent to flit in air; 
Who yearly round the tomb in feather'd flocks repair. 

Theseus mean-while acquitting well his share 
In the bold chace confed'rate like a war, 
To Athens' lofty tow'rs his march ordain'd, 
By Pallas lov'd, and where Erectheus reign'd. 
But Achelous stop'd him on the way, 
By rains a deluge, and constrain'd his stay. 

O fam'd for glorious deeds, and great by blood, 
Rest here, says he, nor trust the rapid flood; 
It solid oaks has from its margin tore, 
And rocky fragments down its current bore, 
The murmur hoarse, and terrible the roar. 
Oft have I seen herds with their shelt'ring fold 
Forc'd from the banks, and in the torrent roul'd; 
Nor strength the bulky steer from ruin freed, 
Nor matchless swiftness sav'd the racing steed. 
In cataracts when the dissolving snow 
Falls from the hills, and floods the plains below; 
Toss'd by the eddies with a giddy round, 
Strong youths are in the sucking whirlpools drown'd. 
'Tis best with me in safety to abide, 
'Till usual bounds restrain the ebbing tide, 
And the low waters in their channel glide. 

Theseus perswaded, in compliance bow'd: 
So kind an offer, and advice so good, 
O Achelous, cannot be refus'd; 
I'll use them both, said he; and both he us'd. 

The grot he enter'd, pumice built the hall, 
And tophi made the rustick of the wall; 
The floor, soft moss, an humid carpet spread, 
And various shells the chequer'd roof inlaid. 
'Twas now the hour when the declining sun 
Two thirds had of his daily journey run; 
At the spread table Theseus took his place, 
Next his companions in the daring chace; 
Perithous here, there elder Lelex lay, 
His locks betraying age with sprinkled grey. 
Acharnia's river-God dispos'd the rest, 
Grac'd with the equal honour of the feast, 
Elate with joy, and proud of such a guest. 
The nymphs were waiters, and with naked feet 
In order serv'd the courses of the meat. 
The banquet done, delicious wine they brought, 
Of one transparent gem the cup was wrought. 

Then the great heroe of this gallant train, 
Surveying far the prospect of the main: 
What is that land, says he, the waves embrace? 
(And with his finger pointed at the place); 
Is it one parted isle which stands alone? 
How nam'd? and yet methinks it seems not one. 
To whom the watry God made this reply; 
'Tis not one isle, but five; distinct they lye; 
'Tis distance which deceives the cheated eye. 
But that Diana's act may seem less strange, 
These once proud Naiads were, before their change. 
'Twas on a day more solemn than the rest, 
Ten bullocks slain, a sacrificial feast: 
The rural Gods of all the region near 
They bid to dance, and taste the hallow'd cheer. 
Me they forgot: affronted with the slight, 
My rage, and stream swell'd to the greatest height; 
And with the torrent of my flooding store, 
Large woods from woods, and fields from fields I tore. 
The guilty nymphs, oh! then, remembring me, 
I, with their country, wash'd into the sea; 
And joining waters with the social main, 
Rent the gross land, and split the firm champagne. 
Since, the Echinades, remote from shore 
Are view'd as many isles, as nymphs before. 

But yonder far, lo, yonder does appear 
An isle, a part to me for ever dear. 
From that (it sailors Perimele name) 
I doating, forc'd by rape a virgin's fame. 
Hippodamas's passion grew so strong, 
Gall'd with th' abuse, and fretted at the wrong, 
He cast his pregnant daughter from a rock; 
I spread my waves beneath, and broke the shock; 
And as her swimming weight my stream convey'd, 
I su'd for help divine, and thus I pray'd: 
O pow'rful thou, whose trident does command 
The realm of waters, which surround the land; 
We sacred rivers, wheresoe'er begun, 
End in thy lot, and to thy empire run. 
With favour hear, and help with present aid; 
Her whom I bear 'twas guilty I betray'd. 
Yet if her father had been just, or mild, 
He would have been less impious to his child; 
In her, have pity'd force in the abuse; 
In me, admitted love for my excuse. 
O let relief for her hard case be found, 
Her, whom paternal rage expell'd from ground, 
Her, whom paternal rage relentless drown'd. 
Grant her some place, or change her to a place, 
Which I may ever clasp with my embrace. 

His nodding head the sea's great ruler bent, 
And all his waters shook with his assent. 
The nymph still swam, tho' with the fright distrest, 
I felt her heart leap trembling in her breast; 
But hardning soon, whilst I her pulse explore, 
A crusting Earth cas'd her stiff body o'er; 
And as accretions of new-cleaving soil 
Inlarg'd the mass, the nymph became an isle. 

Thus Achelous ends: his audience hear 
With admiration, and admiring, fear 
The Pow'rs of Heav'n; except Ixion's Son, 
Who laugh'd at all the Gods, believ'd in none: 
He shook his impious head, and thus replies. 
These legends are no more than pious lies: 
You attribute too much to heav'nly sway, 
To think they give us forms, and take away. 

The rest of better minds, their sense declar'd 
Against this doctrine, and with horror heard. 
Then Lelex rose, an old experienc'd man, 
And thus with sober gravity began; 
Heav'n's pow'r is infinite: Earth, Air, and Sea, 
The manufacture mass, the making Pow'r obey: 
By proof to clear your doubt; in Phrygian ground 
Two neighb'ring trees, with walls encompass'd round, 
Stand on a mod'rate rise, with wonder shown, 
One a hard oak, a softer linden one: 
I saw the place, and them, by Pittheus sent 
To Phrygian realms, my grandsire's government. 
Not far from thence is seen a lake, the haunt 
Of coots, and of the fishing cormorant: 
Here Jove with Hermes came; but in disguise 
Of mortal men conceal'd their deities; 
One laid aside his thunder, one his rod; 
And many toilsome steps together trod: 
For harbour at a thousand doors they knock'd, 
Not one of all the thousand but was lock'd. 
At last an hospitable house they found, 
A homely shed; the roof, not far from ground, 
Was thatch'd with reeds, and straw, together bound. 
There Baucis and Philemon liv'd, and there 
Had liv'd long marry'd, and a happy pair: 
Now old in love, though little was their store, 
Inur'd to want, their poverty they bore, 
Nor aim'd at wealth, professing to be poor. 
For master, or for servant here to call, 
Was all alike, where only two were all. 
Command was none, where equal love was paid, 
Or rather both commanded, both obey'd. 

From lofty roofs the Gods repuls'd before, 
Now stooping, enter'd through the little door: 
The man (their hearty welcome first express'd) 
A common settle drew for either guest, 
Inviting each his weary limbs to rest. 
But ere they sate, officious Baucis lays 
Two cushions stuff'd with straw, the seat to raise; 
Coarse, but the best she had; then rakes the load 
Of ashes from the hearth, and spreads abroad 
The living coals; and, lest they should expire, 
With leaves, and bark she feeds her infant fire: 
It smoaks; and then with trembling breath she blows, 
'Till in a chearful blaze the flames arose. 
With brush-wood, and with chips she strengthens these, 
And adds at last the boughs of rotten trees. 
The fire thus form'd, she sets the kettle on 
(Like burnish'd gold the little seether shone), 
Next took the coleworts which her husband got 
From his own ground (a small well-water'd spot); 
She stripp'd the stalks of all their leaves; the best 
She cull'd, and them with handy care she drest. 
High o'er the hearth a chine of bacon hung; 
Good old Philemon seiz'd it with a prong, 
And from the sooty rafter drew it down, 
Then cut a slice, but scarce enough for one; 
Yet a large portion of a little store, 
Which for their sakes alone he wish'd were more. 
This in the pot he plung'd without delay, 
To tame the flesh, and drain the salt away. 
The time beween, before the fire they sat, 
And shorten'd the delay by pleasing chat. 

A beam there was, on which a beechen pail 
Hung by the handle, on a driven nail: 
This fill'd with water, gently warm'd, they set 
Before their guests; in this they bath'd their feet, 
And after with clean towels dry'd their sweat. 
This done, the host produc'd the genial bed, 
Sallow the feet, the borders, and the sted, 
Which with no costly coverlet they spread, 
But coarse old garments; yet such robes as these 
They laid alone, at feasts, on holidays. 
The good old housewife, tucking up her gown, 
The table sets; th' invited Gods lie down. 
The trivet-table of a foot was lame, 
A blot which prudent Baucis overcame, 
Who thrusts beneath the limping leg a sherd, 
So was the mended board exactly rear'd: 
Then rubb'd it o'er with newly gather'd mint, 
A wholsom herb, that breath'd a grateful scent. 
Pallas began the feast, where first was seen 
The party-colour'd olive, black, and green: 
Autumnal cornels next in order serv'd, 
In lees of wine well pickled, and preserv'd. 
A garden-sallad was the third supply, 
Of endive, radishes, and succory: 
Then curds, and cream, the flow'r of country fare, 
And new-laid eggs, which Baucis' busie care 
Turn'd by a gentle fire, and roasted rare. 
All these in earthen ware were serv'd to board; 
And next in place, an earthen pitcher stor'd, 
With liquor of the best the cottage could afford. 
This was the table's ornament and pride, 
With figures wrought: like pages at his side 
Stood beechen bowls; and these were shining clean, 
Varnish'd with wax without, and lin'd within. 
By this the boiling kettle had prepar'd, 
And to the table sent the smoaking lard; 
On which with eager appetite they dine, 
A sav'ry bit, that serv'd to relish wine: 
The wine itself was suiting to the rest, 
Still working in the must, and lately press'd. 
The second course succeeds like that before, 
Plums, apples, nuts, and of their wintry store 
Dry figs, and grapes, and wrinkled dates were set 
In canisters, t' enlarge the little treat: 
All these a milk-white honey-comb surround, 
Which in the midst the country-banquet crown'd: 
But the kind hosts their entertainment grace 
With hearty welcome, and an open face: 
In all they did, you might discern with ease, 
A willing mind, and a desire to please. 

Mean-time the beechen bowls went round, and still, 
Though often empty'd, were observ'd to fill; 
Fill'd without hands, and of their own accord 
Ran without feet, and danc'd about the board. 
Devotion seiz'd the pair, to see the feast 
With wine, and of no common grape, increas'd; 
And up they held their hands, and fell to pray'r, 
Excusing, as they could, their country fare. 

One goose they had ('twas all they could allow), 
A wakeful centry, and on duty now, 
Whom to the Gods for sacrifice they vow: 
Her with malicious zeal the couple view'd; 
She ran for life, and limping they pursu'd: 
Full well the fowl perceiv'd their bad intent, 
And would not make her master's compliment; 
But persecuted, to the Pow'rs she flies, 
And close between the legs of Jove she lies: 
He with a gracious ear the suppliant heard, 
And sav'd her life; then what he has declar'd, 
And own'd the God. The neighbourhood, said he, 
Shall justly perish for impiety: 
You stand alone exempted; but obey 
With speed, and follow where we lead the way: 
Leave these accurs'd; and to the mountain's height 
Ascend; nor once look backward in your flight. 

They haste, and what their tardy feet deny'd, 
The trusty staff (their better leg) supply'd. 
An arrow's flight they wanted to the top, 
And there secure, but spent with travel, stop; 
Then turn their now no more forbidden eyes; 
Lost in a lake the floated level lies: 
A watry desart covers all the plains, 
Their cot alone, as in an isle, remains. 
Wondring, with weeping eyes, while they deplore 
Their neighbours' fate, and country now no more, 
Their little shed, scarce large enough for two, 
Seems, from the ground increas'd, in height and bulk to grow.

A stately temple shoots within the skies, 
The crotches of their cot in columns rise: 
The pavement polish'd marble they behold, 
The gates with sculpture grac'd, the spires and tiles of gold.

Then thus the sire of Gods, with looks serene, 
Speak thy desire, thou only just of men; 
And thou, o woman, only worthy found 
To be with such a man in marriage bound. 

A-while they whisper; then, to Jove address'd, 
Philemon thus prefers their joint request: 
We crave to serve before your sacred shrine, 
And offer at your altars rites divine: 
And since not any action of our life 
Has been polluted with domestick strife; 
We beg one hour of death, that neither she 
With widow's tears may live to bury me, 
Nor weeping I, with wither'd arms may bear 
My breathless Baucis to the sepulcher. 

The Godheads sign their suit. They run their race 
In the same tenour all th' appointed space: 
Then, when their hour was come, while they relate 
These past adventures at the temple gate, 
Old Baucis is by old Philemon seen 
Sprouting with sudden leaves of spritely green: 
Old Baucis look'd where old Philemon stood, 
And saw his lengthen'd arms a sprouting wood: 
New roots their fasten'd feet begin to bind, 
Their bodies stiffen in a rising rind: 
Then, ere the bark above their shoulders grew, 
They give, and take at once their last adieu. 
At once, Farewell, o faithful spouse, they said; 
At once th' incroaching rinds their closing lips invade.

Ev'n yet, an ancient Tyanaean shows 
A spreading oak, that near a linden grows; 
The neighbourhood confirm the prodigy, 
Grave men, not vain of tongue, or like to lie. 
I saw my self the garlands on their boughs, 
And tablets hung for gifts of granted vows; 
And off'ring fresher up, with pious pray'r, 
The good, said I, are God's peculiar care, 
And such as honour Heav'n, shall heav'nly honour share. 

He ceas'd in his relation to proceed, 
Whilst all admir'd the author, and the deed; 
But Theseus most, inquisitive to know 
From Gods what wondrous alterations grow. 
Whom thus the Calydonian stream address'd, 
Rais'd high to speak, the couch his elbow press'd. 
Some, when transform'd, fix in the lasting change; 
Some with more right, thro' various figures range. 
Proteus, thus large thy privilege was found, 
Thou inmate of the seas, which Earth surround. 
Sometimes a bloming youth you grac'd the shore; 
Oft a fierce lion, or a furious boar: 
With glist'ning spires now seem'd an hissing snake, 
The bold would tremble in his hands to take: 
With horns assum'd a bull; sometimes you prov'd 
A tree by roots, a stone by weight unmov'd: 
Sometimes two wav'ring contraries became, 
Flow'd down in water, or aspir'd in flame. 

In various shapes thus to deceive the eyes, 
Without a settled stint of her disguise, 
Rash Erisichthon's daughter had the pow'r, 
And brought it to Autolicus in dow'r. 
Her atheist sire the slighted Gods defy'd, 
And ritual honours to their shrines deny'd. 
As fame reports, his hand an ax sustain'd, 
Which Ceres' consecrated grove prophan'd; 
Which durst the venerable gloom invade, 
And violate with light the awful shade. 
An ancient oak in the dark center stood, 
The covert's glory, and itself a wood: 
Garlands embrac'd its shaft, and from the boughs 
Hung tablets, monuments of prosp'rous vows. 
In the cool dusk its unpierc'd verdure spread, 
The Dryads oft their hallow'd dances led; 
And oft, when round their gaging arms they cast, 
Full fifteen ells it measu'rd in the waste: 
Its height all under standards did surpass, 
As they aspir'd above the humbler grass. 

These motives, which would gentler minds restrain, 
Could not make Triope's bold son abstain; 
He sternly charg'd his slaves with strict decree, 
To fell with gashing steel the sacred tree. 
But whilst they, lingring, his commands delay'd, 
He snatch'd an Ax, and thus blaspheming said: 
Was this no oak, nor Ceres' favourite care, 
But Ceres' self, this arm, unaw'd, shou'd dare 
Its leafy honours in the dust to spread, 
And level with the earth its airy head. 
He spoke, and as he poiz'd a slanting stroak, 
Sighs heav'd, and tremblings shook the frighted oak; 
Its leaves look'd sickly, pale its acorns grew, 
And its long branches sweat a chilly dew. 
But when his impious hand a wound bestow'd, 
Blood from the mangled bark in currents flow'd. 
When a devoted bull of mighty size, 
A sinning nation's grand atonement, dies; 
With such a plenty from the spouting veins, 
A crimson stream the turfy altars stains. 

The wonder all amaz'd; yet one more bold, 
The fact dissuading, strove his ax to hold. 
But the Thessalian, obstinately bent, 
Too proud to change, too harden'd to repent, 
On his kind monitor, his eyes, which burn'd 
With rage, and with his eyes his weapon turn'd; 
Take the reward, says he, of pious dread: 
Then with a blow lopp'd off his parted head. 
No longer check'd, the wretch his crime pursu'd, 
Doubled his strokes, and sacrilege renew'd; 
When from the groaning trunk a voice was heard, 
A Dryad I, by Ceres' love preferr'd, 
Within the circle of this clasping rind 
Coeval grew, and now in ruin join'd; 
But instant vengeance shall thy sin pursue, 
And death is chear'd with this prophetick view. 

At last the oak with cords enforc'd to bow, 
Strain'd from the top, and sap'd with wounds below, 
The humbler wood, partaker of its fate, 
Crush'd with its fall, and shiver'd with its weight. 

The grove destroy'd, the sister Dryads moan, 
Griev'd at its loss, and frighted at their own. 
Strait, suppliants for revenge to Ceres go, 
In sable weeds, expressive of their woe. 

The beauteous Goddess with a graceful air 
Bow'd in consent, and nodded to their pray'r. 
The awful motion shook the fruitful ground, 
And wav'd the fields with golden harvests crown'd. 
Soon she contriv'd in her projecting mind 
A plague severe, and piteous in its kind 
(If plagues for crimes of such presumptuous height 
Could pity in the softest breast create). 
With pinching want, and hunger's keenest smart, 
To tear his vitals, and corrode his heart. 
But since her near approach by Fate's deny'd 
To famine, and broad climes their pow'rs divide, 
A nymph, the mountain's ranger, she address'd, 
And thus resolv'd, her high commands express'd. 

Where frozen Scythia's utmost bound is plac'd, 
A desart lies, a melancholy waste: 
In yellow crops there Nature never smil'd, 
No fruitful tree to shade the barren wild. 
There sluggish cold its icy station makes, 
There paleness, frights, and aguish trembling shakes, 
Of pining famine this the fated seat, 
To whom my orders in these words repeat: 
Bid her this miscreant with her sharpest pains 
Chastise, and sheath herself into his veins; 
Be unsubdu'd by plenty's baffled store, 
Reject my empire, and defeat my pow'r. 
And lest the distance, and the tedious way, 
Should with the toil, and long fatigue dismay, 
Ascend my chariot, and convey'd on high, 
Guide the rein'd dragons thro' the parting sky. 

The nymph, accepting of the granted carr, 
Sprung to the seat, and posted thro' the air; 
Nor stop'd 'till she to a bleak mountain came 
Of wondrous height, and Caucasus its name. 
There in a stony field the fiend she found, 
Herbs gnawing, and roots scratching from the ground. 
Her elfelock hair in matted tresses grew, 
Sunk were her eyes, and pale her ghastly hue, 
Wan were her lips, and foul with clammy glew. 
Her throat was furr'd, her guts appear'd within 
With snaky crawlings thro' her parchment skin. 
Her jutting hips seem'd starting from their place, 
And for a belly was a belly's space, 
Her dugs hung dangling from her craggy spine, 
Loose to her breast, and fasten'd to her chine. 
Her joints protuberant by leanness grown, 
Consumption sunk the flesh, and rais'd the bone. 
Her knees large orbits bunch'd to monstrous size, 
And ancles to undue proportion rise. 

This plague the nymph, not daring to draw near, 
At distance hail'd, and greeted from afar. 
And tho' she told her charge without delay, 
Tho' her arrival late, and short her stay, 
She felt keen famine, or she seem'd to feel, 
Invade her blood, and on her vitals steal. 
She turn'd, from the infection to remove, 
And back to Thessaly the serpents drove. 

The fiend obey'd the Goddess' command 
(Tho' their effects in opposition stand), 
She cut her way, supported by the wind, 
And reach'd the mansion by the nymph assign'd. 

'Twas night, when entring Erisichthon's room, 
Dissolv'd in sleep, and thoughtless of his doom, 
She clasp'd his limbs, by impious labour tir'd, 
With battish wings, but her whole self inspir'd; 
Breath'd on his throat and chest a tainting blast, 
And in his veins infus'd an endless fast. 

The task dispatch'd, away the Fury flies 
From plenteous regions, and from rip'ning skies; 
To her old barren north she wings her speed, 
And cottages distress'd with pinching need. 

Still slumbers Erisichthon's senses drown, 
And sooth his fancy with their softest down. 
He dreams of viands delicate to eat, 
And revels on imaginary meat, 
Chaws with his working mouth, but chaws in vain, 
And tires his grinding teeth with fruitless pain; 
Deludes his throat with visionary fare, 
Feasts on the wind, and banquets on the air. 

The morning came, the night, and slumbers past, 
But still the furious pangs of hunger last; 
The cank'rous rage still gnaws with griping pains, 
Stings in his throat, and in his bowels reigns. 

Strait he requires, impatient in demand, 
Provisions from the air, the seas, the land. 
But tho' the land, air, seas, provisions grant, 
Starves at full tables, and complains of want. 
What to a people might in dole be paid, 
Or victual cities for a long blockade, 
Could not one wolfish appetite asswage; 
For glutting nourishment increas'd its rage. 
As rivers pour'd from ev'ry distant shore, 
The sea insatiate drinks, and thirsts for more; 
Or as the fire, which all materials burns, 
And wasted forests into ashes turns, 
Grows more voracious, as the more it preys, 
Recruits dilate the flame, and spread the blaze: 
So impious Erisichthon's hunger raves, 
Receives refreshments, and refreshments craves. 
Food raises a desire for food, and meat 
Is but a new provocative to eat. 
He grows more empty, as the more supply'd, 
And endless cramming but extends the void. 

Now riches hoarded by paternal care 
Were sunk, the glutton swallowing up the heir. 
Yet the devouring flame no stores abate, 
Nor less his hunger grew with his estate. 
One daughter left, as left his keen desire, 
A daughter worthy of a better sire: 
Her too he sold, spent Nature to sustain; 
She scorn'd a lord with generous disdain, 
And flying, spread her hand upon the main. 
Then pray'd: Grant, thou, I bondage may escape, 
And with my liberty reward thy rape; 
Repay my virgin treasure with thy aid 
('Twas Neptune who deflower'd the beauteous maid). 

The God was mov'd, at what the fair had su'd, 
When she so lately by her master view'd 
In her known figure, on a sudden took 
A fisher's habit, and a manly look. 
To whom her owner hasted to enquire; 
O thou, said he, whose baits hide treach'rous wire; 
Whose art can manage, and experienc'd skill 
The taper angle, and the bobbing quill, 
So may the sea be ruffled with no storm, 
But smooth with calms, as you the truth inform; 
So your deceit may no shy fishes feel, 
'Till struck, and fasten'd on the bearded steel. 
Did not you standing view upon the strand, 
A wand'ring maid? I'm sure I saw her stand; 
Her hair disorder'd, and her homely dress 
Betray'd her want, and witness'd her distress. 

Me heedless, she reply'd, whoe'er you are, 
Excuse, attentive to another care. 
I settled on the deep my steady eye; 
Fix'd on my float, and bent on my employ. 
And that you may not doubt what I impart, 
So may the ocean's God assist my art, 
If on the beach since I my sport pursu'd, 
Or man, or woman but my self I view'd. 
Back o'er the sands, deluded, he withdrew, 
Whilst she for her old form put off her new. 

Her sire her shifting pow'r to change perceiv'd; 
And various chapmen by her sale deceiv'd. 
A fowl with spangled plumes, a brinded steer, 
Sometimes a crested mare, or antler'd deer: 
Sold for a price, she parted, to maintain 
Her starving parent with dishonest gain. 

At last all means, as all provisions, fail'd; 
For the disease by remedies prevail'd; 
His muscles with a furious bite he tore, 
Gorg'd his own tatter'd flesh, and gulph'd his gore. 
Wounds were his feast, his life to life a prey, 
Supporting Nature by its own decay. 

But foreign stories why shou'd I relate? 
I too my self can to new forms translate, 
Tho' the variety's not unconfin'd, 
But fix'd, in number, and restrain'd in kind: 
For often I this present shape retain, 
Oft curl a snake the volumes of my train. 
Sometimes my strength into my horns transfer'd, 
A bull I march, the captain of the herd. 
But whilst I once those goring weapons wore, 
Vast wresting force one from my forehead tore. 
Lo, my maim'd brows the injury still own; 
He ceas'd; his words concluding with a groan. 

Theseus requests the God to tell his woes, 
Whence his maim'd brow, and whence his groans arose 
Whence thus the Calydonian stream reply'd, 
With twining reeds his careless tresses ty'd: 
Ungrateful is the tale; for who can bear, 
When conquer'd, to rehearse the shameful war? 
Yet I'll the melancholy story trace; 
So great a conqu'ror softens the disgrace: 
Nor was it still so mean the prize to yield, 
As great, and glorious to dispute the field. 
Perhaps you've heard of Deianira's name, 
For all the country spoke her beauty's fame. 
Long was the nymph by num'rous suitors woo'd, 
Each with address his envy'd hopes pursu'd: 
I joyn'd the loving band; to gain the fair, 
Reveal'd my passion to her father's ear. 
Their vain pretensions all the rest resign, 
Alcides only strove to equal mine; 
He boasts his birth from Jove, recounts his spoils, 
His step-dame's hate subdu'd, and finish'd toils. 

Can mortals then (said I), with Gods compare? 
Behold a God; mine is the watry care: 
Through your wide realms I take my mazy way, 
Branch into streams, and o'er the region stray: 
No foreign guest your daughter's charms adores, 
But one who rises in your native shores. 
Let not his punishment your pity move; 
Is Juno's hate an argument for love? 
Though you your life from fair Alcmena drew, 
Jove's a feign'd father, or by fraud a true. 
Chuse then; confess thy mother's honour lost, 
Or thy descent from Jove no longer boast. 

While thus I spoke, he look'd with stern disdain, 
Nor could the sallies of his wrath restrain, 
Which thus break forth. This arm decides our right; 
Vanquish in words, be mine the prize in fight. 

Bold he rush'd on. My honour to maintain, 
I fling my verdant garments on the plain, 
My arms stretch forth, my pliant limbs prepare, 
And with bent hands expect the furious war. 
O'er my sleek skin now gather'd dust he throws, 
And yellow sand his mighty muscles strows. 
Oft he my neck, and nimble legs assails, 
He seems to grasp me, but as often fails. 
Each part he now invades with eager hand; 
Safe in my bulk, immoveable I stand. 
So when loud storms break high, and foam and roar 
Against some mole that stretches from the shore; 
The firm foundation lasting tempests braves, 
Defies the warring winds, and driving waves. 

A-while we breathe, then forward rush amain, 
Renew the combat, and our ground maintain; 
Foot strove with foot, I prone extend my breast, 
Hands war with hands, and forehead forehead prest. 
Thus have I seen two furious bulls engage, 
Inflam'd with equal love, and equal rage; 
Each claims the fairest heifer of the grove, 
And conquest only can decide their love: 
The trembling herds survey the fight from far, 
'Till victory decides th' important war. 
Three times in vain he strove my joints to wrest, 
To force my hold, and throw me from his breast; 
The fourth he broke my gripe, that clasp'd him round, 
Then with new force he stretch'd me on the ground; 
Close to my back the mighty burthen clung, 
As if a mountain o'er my limbs were flung. 
Believe my tale; nor do I, boastful, aim 
By feign'd narration to extol my fame. 
No sooner from his grasp I freedom get, 
Unlock my arms, that flow'd with trickling sweat, 
But quick he seized me, and renew'd the strife, 
As my exhausted bosom pants for life: 
My neck he gripes, my knee to earth he strains; 
I fall, and bite the sand with shame, and pains. 

O'er-match'd in strength, to wiles, and arts I take, 
And slip his hold, in form of speckled snake; 
Who, when I wreath'd in spires my body round, 
Or show'd my forky tongue with hissing sound, 
Smiles at my threats: Such foes my cradle knew, 
He cries, dire snakes my infant hand o'erthrew; 
A dragon's form might other conquests gain, 
To war with me you take that shape in vain. 
Art thou proportion'd to the Hydra's length, 
Who by his wounds receiv'd augmented strength? 
He rais'd a hundred hissing heads in air; 
When one I lopt, up-sprung a dreadful pair. 
By his wounds fertile, and with slaughter strong, 
Singly I quell'd him, and stretch'd dead along. 
What canst thou do, a form precarious, prone, 
To rouse my rage with terrors not thy own? 
He said; and round my neck his hands he cast, 
And with his straining fingers wrung me fast; 
My throat he tortur'd, close as pincers clasp, 
In vain I strove to loose the forceful grasp. 

Thus vanquish'd too, a third form still remains, 
Chang'd to a bull, my lowing fills the plains. 
Strait on the left his nervous arms were thrown 
Upon my brindled neck, and tugg'd it down; 
Then deep he struck my horn into the sand, 
And fell'd my bulk among the dusty land. 
Nor yet his fury cool'd; 'twixt rage and scorn, 
From my maim'd front he tore the stubborn horn: 
This, heap'd with flow'rs, and fruits, the Naiads bear, 
Sacred to plenty, and the bounteous year. 

He spoke; when lo, a beauteous nymph appears, 
Girt like Diana's train, with flowing hairs; 
The horn she brings in which all Autumn's stor'd, 
And ruddy apples for the second board. 

Now morn begins to dawn, the sun's bright fire 
Gilds the high mountains, and the youths retire; 
Nor stay'd they, 'till the troubled stream subsides, 
And in its bounds with peaceful current glides. 
But Achelous in his oozy bed 
Deep hides his brow deform'd, and rustick head: 
No real wound the victor's triumph show'd, 
But his lost honours griev'd the watry God; 
Yet ev'n that loss the willow's leaves o'erspread, 
And verdant reeds, in garlands, bind his head. 

This virgin too, thy love, O Nessus, found, 
To her alone you owe the fatal wound. 
As the strong son of Jove his bride conveys, 
Where his paternal lands their bulwarks raise; 
Where from her slopy urn, Evenus pours 
Her rapid current, swell'd by wintry show'rs, 
He came. The frequent eddies whirl'd the tide, 
And the deep rolling waves all pass deny'd. 
As for himself, he stood unmov'd by fears, 
For now his bridal charge employ'd his cares, 
The strong-limb'd Nessus thus officious cry'd 
(For he the shallows of the stream had try'd), 
Swim thou, Alcides, all thy strength prepare, 
On yonder bank I'll lodge thy nuptial care. 

Th' Aonian chief to Nessus trusts his wife, 
All pale, and trembling for her heroe's life: 
Cloath'd as he stood in the fierce lion's hide, 
The laden quiver o'er his shoulder ty'd 
(For cross the stream his bow and club were cast), 
Swift he plung'd in: These billows shall be past, 
He said, nor sought where smoother waters glide, 
But stem'd the rapid dangers of the tide. 
The bank he reach'd; again the bow he bears; 
When, hark! his bride's known voice alarms his ears. 
Nessus, to thee I call (aloud he cries) 
Vain is thy trust in flight, be timely wise: 
Thou monster double-shap'd, my right set free; 
If thou no rev'rence owe my fame and me, 
Yet kindred should thy lawless lust deny; 
Think not, perfidious wretch, from me to fly, 
Tho' wing'd with horse's speed; wounds shall pursue; 
Swift as his words the fatal arrow flew: 
The centaur's back admits the feather'd wood, 
And thro' his breast the barbed weapon stood; 
Which when, in anguish, thro' the flesh he tore, 
From both the wounds gush'd forth the spumy gore 
Mix'd with Lernaean venom; this he took, 
Nor dire revenge his dying breast forsook. 
His garment, in the reeking purple dy'd, 
To rouse love's passion, he presents the bride. 

Now a long interval of time succeeds, 
When the great son of Jove's immortal deeds, 
And step-dame's hate, had fill'd Earth's utmost round; 
He from Oechalia, with new lawrels crown'd, 
In triumph was return'd. He rites prepares, 
And to the King of Gods directs his pray'rs; 
When Fame (who falshood cloaths in truth's disguise, 
And swells her little bulk with growing lies) 
Thy tender ear, o Deianira, mov'd, 
That Hercules the fair Iole lov'd. 
Her love believes the tale; the truth she fears 
Of his new passion, and gives way to tears. 
The flowing tears diffus'd her wretched grief, 
Why seek I thus, from streaming eyes, relief? 
She cries; indulge not thus these fruitless cares, 
The harlot will but triumph in thy tears: 
Let something be resolv'd, while yet there's time; 
My bed not conscious of a rival's crime. 
In silence shall I mourn, or loud complain? 
Shall I seek Calydon, or here remain? 
What tho', ally'd to Meleager's fame, 
I boast the honours of a sister's name? 
My wrongs, perhaps, now urge me to pursue 
Some desp'rate deed, by which the world shall view 
How far revenge, and woman's rage can rise, 
When weltring in her blood the harlot dies. 

Thus various passions rul'd by turns her breast, 
She now resolves to send the fatal vest, 
Dy'd with Lernaean gore, whose pow'r might move 
His soul anew, and rouse declining love. 
Nor knew she what her sudden rage bestows, 
When she to Lychas trusts her future woes; 
With soft endearments she the boy commands, 
To bear the garment to her husband's hands. 

Th' unwitting hero takes the gift in haste, 
And o'er his shoulders Lerna's poison cast, 
As first the fire with frankincense he strows, 
And utters to the Gods his holy vows; 
And on the marble altar's polish'd frame 
Pours forth the grapy stream; the rising flame 
Sudden dissolves the subtle pois'nous juice, 
Which taints his blood, and all his nerves bedews. 
With wonted fortitude he bore the smart, 
And not a groan confess'd his burning heart. 
At length his patience was subdu'd by pain, 
He rends the sacred altar from the plain; 
Oete's wide forests echo with his cries: 
Now to rip off the deathful robe he tries. 
Where-e'er he plucks the vest, the skin he tears, 
The mangled muscles, and huge bones he bares 
(A ghastful sight!), or raging with his pain, 
To rend the sticking plague he tugs in vain. 

As the red iron hisses in the flood, 
So boils the venom in his curdling blood. 
Now with the greedy flame his entrails glow, 
And livid sweats down all his body flow; 
The cracking nerves burnt up are burst in twain, 
The lurking venom melts his swimming brain. 

Then, lifting both his hands aloft, he cries, 
Glut thy revenge, dread Empress of the skies; 
Sate with my death the rancour of thy heart, 
Look down with pleasure, and enjoy my smart. 
Or, if e'er pity mov'd a hostile breast 
(For here I stand thy enemy profest), 
Take hence this hateful life, with tortures torn, 
Inur'd to trouble, and to labours born. 
Death is the gift most welcome to my woe, 
And such a gift a stepdame may bestow. 
Was it for this Busiris was subdu'd, 
Whose barb'rous temples reek'd with strangers' blood? 
Press'd in these arms his fate Antaeus found, 
Nor gain'd recruited vigour from the ground. 
Did I not triple-form'd Geryon fell? 
Or did I fear the triple dog of Hell? 
Did not these hands the bull's arm'd forehead hold? 
Are not our mighty toils in Elis told? 
Do not Stymphalian lakes proclaim thy fame? 
And fair Parthenian woods resound thy name? 
Who seiz'd the golden belt of Thermodon? 
And who the dragon-guarded apples won? 
Could the fierce centaur's strength my force withstand, 
Or the fell boar that spoil'd th' Arcadian land? 
Did not these arms the Hydra's rage subdue, 
Who from his wounds to double fury grew? 
What if the Thracian horses, fat with gore, 
Who human bodies in their mangers tore, 
I saw, and with their barb'rous lord o'erthrew? 
What if these hands Nemaea's lion slew? 
Did not this neck the heav'nly globe sustain? 
The female partner of the Thunderer's reign 
Fatigu'd, at length suspends her harsh commands, 
Yet no fatigue hath slack'd these valiant hands. 
But now new plagues pursue me, neither force, 
Nor arms, nor darts can stop their raging course. 
Devouring flame thro' my rack'd entrails strays, 
And on my lungs and shrivel'd muscles preys. 
Yet still Eurystheus breathes the vital air. 
What mortal now shall seek the Gods with pray'r? 

The hero said; and with the torture stung, 
Furious o'er Oete's lofty hills he sprung. 
Stuck with the shaft, thus scours the tyger round, 
And seeks the flying author of his wound. 
Now might you see him trembling, now he vents 
His anguish'd soul in groans, and loud laments; 
He strives to tear the clinging vest in vain, 
And with up-rooted forests strows the plain; 
Now kindling into rage, his hands he rears, 
And to his kindred Gods directs his pray'rs. 
When Lychas, lo, he spies; who trembling flew, 
And in a hollow rock conceal'd from view, 
Had shun'd his wrath. Now grief renew'd his pain, 
His madness chaf'd, and thus he raves again. 

Lychas, to thee alone my fate I owe, 
Who bore the gift, the cause of all my woe. 
The youth all pale, with shiv'ring fear was stung, 
And vain excuses falter'd on his tongue. 
Alcides snatch'd him, as with suppliant face 
He strove to clasp his knees, and beg for grace: 
He toss'd him o'er his head with airy course, 
And hurl'd with more than with an engine's force; 
Far o'er th' Eubaean main aloof he flies, 
And hardens by degrees amid the skies. 
So showry drops, when chilly tempests blow, 
Thicken at first, then whiten into snow, 
In balls congeal'd the rolling fleeces bound, 
In solid hail result upon the ground. 
Thus, whirl'd with nervous force thro' distant air, 
The purple tide forsook his veins, with fear; 
All moisture left his limbs. Transform'd to stone, 
In ancient days the craggy flint was known; 
Still in the Eubaean waves his front he rears, 
Still the small rock in human form appears, 
And still the name of hapless Lychas bears. 

But now the hero of immortal birth 
Fells Oete's forests on the groaning Earth; 
A pile he builds; to Philoctetes' care 
He leaves his deathful instruments of war; 
To him commits those arrows, which again 
Shall see the bulwarks of the Trojan reign. 
The son of Paean lights the lofty pyre, 
High round the structure climbs the greedy fire; 
Plac'd on the top, thy nervous shoulders spread 
With the Nemaean spoils, thy careless head 
Rais'd on a knotty club, with look divine, 
Here thou, dread hero, of celestial line, 
Wert stretch'd at ease; as when a chearful guest, 
Wine crown'd thy bowls, and flow'rs thy temples drest. 

Now on all sides the potent flames aspire, 
And crackle round those limbs that mock the fire 
A sudden terror seiz'd th' immortal host, 
Who thought the world's profess'd defender lost. 
This when the Thund'rer saw, with smiles he cries, 
'Tis from your fears, ye Gods, my pleasures rise; 
Joy swells my breast, that my all-ruling hand 
O'er such a grateful people boasts command, 
That you my suff'ring progeny would aid; 
Tho' to his deeds this just respect be paid, 
Me you've oblig'd. Be all your fears forborn, 
Th' Oetean fires do thou, great hero, scorn. 
Who vanquish'd all things, shall subdue the flame. 
That part alone of gross maternal frame 
Fire shall devour; while what from me he drew 
Shall live immortal, and its force subdue; 
That, when he's dead, I'll raise to realms above; 
May all the Pow'rs the righteous act approve. 
If any God dissent, and judge too great 
The sacred honours of the heav'nly seat, 
Ev'n he shall own his deeds deserve the sky, 
Ev'n he reluctant, shall at length comply. 
Th' assembled Pow'rs assent. No frown 'till now 
Had mark'd with passion vengeful Juno's brow, 
Mean-while whate'er was in the pow'r of flame 
Was all consum'd; his body's nervous frame 
No more was known, of human form bereft, 
Th' eternal part of Jove alone was left. 
As an old serpent casts his scaly vest, 
Wreathes in the sun, in youthful glory drest; 
So when Alcides mortal mold resign'd, 
His better part enlarg'd, and grew refin'd; 
August his visage shone; almighty Jove 
In his swift carr his honour'd offspring drove; 
High o'er the hollow clouds the coursers fly, 
And lodge the hero in the starry sky. 

Atlas perceiv'd the load of Heav'n's new guest. 
Revenge still rancour'd in Eurystheus' breast 
Against Alcides' race. Alcmena goes 
To Iole, to vent maternal woes; 
Here she pours forth her grief, recounts the spoils 
Her son had bravely reap'd in glorious toils. 
This Iole, by Hercules' commands, 
Hyllus had lov'd, and joyn'd in nuptial bands. 
Her swelling womb the teeming birth confess'd, 
To whom Alcmena thus her speech address'd. 

O, may the Gods protect thee, in that hour, 
When, 'midst thy throws, thou call'st th' Ilithyan Pow'r!

May no delays prolong thy racking pain, 
As when I su'd for Juno's aid in vain. 

When now Alcides' mighty birth drew nigh, 
And the tenth sign roll'd forward on the sky, 
My womb extends with such a mighty load, 
As Jove the parent of the burthen show'd. 
I could no more th' encreasing smart sustain, 
My horror kindles to recount the pain; 
Cold chills my limbs while I the tale pursue, 
And now methinks I feel my pangs anew. 
Seven days and nights amidst incessant throws, 
Fatigu'd with ills I lay, nor knew repose; 
When lifting high my hands, in shrieks I pray'd, 
Implor'd the Gods, and call'd Lucina's aid. 
She came, but prejudic'd, to give my Fate 
A sacrifice to vengeful Juno's hate. 
She hears the groaning anguish of my fits, 
And on the altar at my door she sits. 
O'er her left knee her crossing leg she cast, 
Then knits her fingers close, and wrings them fast: 
This stay'd the birth; in mutt'ring verse she pray'd, 
The mutt'ring verse th' unfinish'd birth delay'd. 
Now with fierce struggles, raging with my pain, 
At Jove's ingratitude I rave in vain. 
How did I wish for death! such groans I sent, 
As might have made the flinty heart relent. 

Now the Cadmeian matrons round me press, 
Offer their vows, and seek to bring redress; 
Among the Theban dames Galanthis stands, 
Strong limb'd, red hair'd, and just to my commands: 
She first perceiv'd that all these racking woes 
From the persisting hate of Juno rose. 
As here and there she pass'd, by chance she sees 
The seated Goddess; on her close-press'd knees 
Her fast-knit hands she leans; with chearful voice 
Galanthis cries, Whoe'er thou art, rejoyce, 
Congratulate the dame, she lies at rest, 
At length the Gods Alcmena's womb have blest. 
Swift from her seat the startled Goddess springs, 
No more conceal'd, her hands abroad she flings; 
The charm unloos'd, the birth my pangs reliev'd; 
Galanthis' laughter vex'd the Pow'r deceiv'd. 
Fame says, the Goddess dragg'd the laughing maid 
Fast by the hair; in vain her force essay'd 
Her grov'ling body from the ground to rear; 
Chang'd to fore-feet her shrinking arms appear: 
Her hairy back her former hue retains, 
The form alone is lost; her strength remains; 
Who, since the lye did from her mouth proceed, 
Shall from her pregnant mouth bring forth her breed; 
Nor shall she quit her long-frequented home, 
But haunt those houses where she lov'd to roam. 

She said, and for her lost Galanthis sighs; 
When the fair consort of her son replies; 
Since you a servant's ravish'd form bemoan, 
And kindly sigh for sorrows not your own, 
Let me (if tears and grief permit) relate 
A nearer woe, a sister's stranger fate. 

No nymph of all Oechaloa could compare 
For beauteous form with Dryope the fair; 
Her tender mother's only hope and pride 
(My self the offspring of a second bride), 
This nymph, compress'd by him who rules the day, 
Whom Delphi, and the Delian isle obey, 
Andraemon lov'd; and blest in all those charms 
That pleas'd a God, succeeded to her arms. 

A lake there was, with shelving banks around, 
Whose verdant summit fragrant myrtles crown'd. 
Those shades, unknowing of the fates, she sought; 
And to the Naiads flow'ry garlands brought; 
Her smiling babe (a pleasing charge) she prest 
Between her arms, and nourish'd at her breast. 
Not distant far a watry lotos grows; 
The Spring was new, and all the verdant boughs, 
Acorn'd with blossoms, promis'd fruits that vye 
In glowing colours with the Tyrian dye. 
Of these she cropt, to please her infant son, 
And I my self the same rash act had done, 
But, lo! I saw (as near her side I stood) 
The violated blossoms drop with blood; 
Upon the tree I cast a frightful look, 
The trembling tree with sudden horror shook. 
Lotis the nymph (if rural tales be true) 
As from Priapus' lawless lust she flew, 
Forsook her form; and fixing here became 
A flow'ry plant, which still preserves her name. 

This change unknown, astonish'd at the sight, 
My trembling sister strove to urge her flight; 
Yet first the pardon of the Nymphs implor'd, 
And those offended Sylvan pow'rs ador'd: 
But when she backward would have fled, she found 
Her stiff'ning feet were rooted to the ground: 
In vain to free her fasten'd feet she strove, 
And as she struggles only moves above; 
She feels th' incroaching bark around her grow, 
By slow degrees, and cover all below: 
Surpriz'd at this, her trembling hand she heaves 
To rend her hair; her hand is fill'd with leaves; 
Where late was hair, the shooting leaves are seen 
To rise, and shade her with a sudden green. 
The Child Amphisus, to her bosom prest, 
Perceiv'd a colder and a harder breast, 
And found the springs, that n'er 'till then deny'd 
Their milky moisture, on a sudden dry'd. 
I saw, unhappy, what I now relate, 
And stood the helpless witness of thy fate; 
Embrac'd thy boughs, the rising bark delay'd, 
There wish'd to grow, and mingle shade with shade. 

Behold Andraemon, and th' unhappy sire 
Appear, and for their Dryope enquire; 
A springing tree for Dryope they find, 
And print warm kisses on the panting rind; 
Prostrate, with tears their kindred plant bedew, 
And close embrac'd, as to the roots they grew; 
The face was all that now remain'd of thee; 
No more a woman, nor yet quite a tree: 
Thy branches hung with humid pearls appear, 
From ev'ry leaf distills a trickling tear; 
And strait a voice, while yet a voice remains, 
Thus thro' the trembling boughs in sighs complains. 

If to the wretched any faith be giv'n, 
I swear by all th' unpitying Pow'rs of Heav'n, 
No wilful crime this heavy vengeance bred, 
In mutual innocence our lives we led. 
If this be false, let these new greens decay, 
Let sounding axes lop my limbs away, 
And crackling flames on all my honours prey. 
Now from my branching arms this infant bear, 
Let some kind nurse supply a mother's care; 
Yet to his mother let him oft be led, 
Sport in her shades, and in her shades be fed; 
Teach him, when first his infant voice shall frame 
Imperfect words, and lisp his mother's name, 
To hail this tree, and say with weeping eyes, 
Within this plant my hapless parent lies; 
And when in youth he seeks the shady woods, 
Oh, let him fly the chrystal lakes and floods, 
Nor touch the fatal flow'rs; but warn'd by me, 
Believe a Goddess shrin'd in ev'ry tree. 
My sire, my sister, and my spouse farewel! 
If in your breasts or love, or pity, dwell, 
Protect your plant, nor let my branches feel 
The browzing cattle, or the piercing steel. 
Farewel! and since I cannot bend to join 
My lips to yours, advance at least to mine. 
My son, thy mother's parting kiss receive, 
While yet thy mother has a kiss to give. 
I can no more; the creeping rind invades 
My closing lips, and hides my head in shades: 
Remove your hands; the bark shall soon suffice, 
Without their aid, to seal these dying eyes. 
She ceas'd at once to speak, and ceas'd to be; 
And all the nymph was lost within the tree: 
Yet latent life thro' her new branches reign'd, 
And long the plant a human heat retain'd. 

While Iole the fatal change declares, 
Alcmena's pitying hand oft wip'd her tears. 
Grief too stream'd down her cheeks; soon sorrow flies, 
And rising joy the trickling moisture dries, 
Lo Iolaus stands before their eyes. 
A youth he stood; and the soft down began 
O'er his smooth chin to spread, and promise man. 
Hebe submitted to her husband's pray'rs, 
Instill'd new vigour, and restor'd his years. 

Now from her lips a solemn oath had past, 
That Iolaus this gift alone shou'd taste, 
Had not just Themis thus maturely said 
(Which check'd her vow, and aw'd the blooming maid). 

Thebes is embroil'd in war. Capaneus stands 
Invincible, but by the Thund'rer's hands. 
Ambition shall the guilty brothers fire, 
Both rush to mutual wounds, and both expire. 
The reeling Earth shall ope her gloomy womb, 
Where the yet breathing bard shall find his tomb. 
The son shall bath his hands in parents' blood, 
And in one act be both unjust, and good. 
Of home, and sense depriv'd, where-e'er he flies, 
The Furies, and his mother's ghost he spies. 
His wife the fatal bracelet shall implore, 
And Phegeus stain his sword in kindred gore. 
Callirhoe shall then with suppliant pray'r 
Prevail on Jupiter's relenting ear. 
Jove shall with youth her infant sons inspire, 
And bid their bosoms glow with manly fire. 

When Themis thus with prescient voice had spoke, 
Among the Gods a various murmur broke; 
Dissention rose in each immortal breast, 
That one should grant, what was deny'd the rest. 
Aurora for her aged spouse complains, 
And Ceres grieves for Jason's freezing veins; 
Vulcan would Erichthonius' years renew, 
Her future race the care of Venus drew, 
She would Anchises' blooming age restore; 
A diff'rent care employ'd each heav'nly Pow'r: 
Thus various int'rests did their jars encrease, 
'Till Jove arose; he spoke, their tumults cease. 

Is any rev'rence to our presence giv'n, 
Then why this discord 'mong the Pow'rs of Heav'n? 
Who can the settled will of Fate subdue? 
'Twas by the Fates that Iolaus knew 
A second youth. The Fates' determin'd doom 
Shall give Callirhoe's race a youthful bloom. 
Arms, nor ambition can this pow'r obtain; 
Quell your desires; ev'n me the Fates restrain. 
Could I their will controul, no rolling years 
Had Aeacus bent down with silver hairs; 
Then Rhadamanthus still had youth possess'd, 
And Minos with eternal bloom been bless'd. 
Jove's words the synod mov'd; the Pow'rs give o'er, 
And urge in vain unjust complaint no more. 
Since Rhadamanthus' veins now slowly flow'd, 
And Aeacus, and Minos bore the load; 
Minos, who in the flow'r of youth, and fame, 
Made mighty nations tremble at his name, 
Infirm with age, the proud Miletus fears, 
Vain of his birth, and in the strength of years, 
And now regarding all his realms as lost, 
He durst not force him from his native coast. 
But you by choice, Miletus, fled his reign, 
And thy swift vessel plow'd th' Aegean main; 
On Asiatick shores a town you frame, 
Which still is honour'd with the founder's name. 
Here you Cyanee knew, the beauteous maid, 
As on her father's winding banks she stray'd: 
Caunus and Byblis hence their lineage trace, 
The double offspring of your warm embrace. 

Let the sad fate of wretched Byblis prove 
A dismal warning to unlawful love; 
One birth gave being to the hapless pair, 
But more was Caunus than a sister's care; 
Unknown she lov'd, for yet the gentle fire 
Rose not in flames, nor kindled to desire, 
'Twas thought no sin to wonder at his charms, 
Hang on his neck, and languish in his arms; 
Thus wing'd with joy, fled the soft hours away, 
And all the fatal guilt on harmless Nature lay. 

But love (too soon from piety declin'd) 
Insensibly deprav'd her yielding mind. 
Dress'd she appears, with nicest art adorn'd, 
And ev'ry youth, but her lov'd brother, scorn'd; 
For him alone she labour'd to be fair, 
And curst all charms that might with hers compare. 
'Twas she, and only she, must Caunus please, 
Sick at her heart, yet knew not her disease: 
She call'd him lord, for brother was a name 
Too cold, and dull for her aspiring flame; 
And when he spoke, if sister he reply'd, 
For Byblis change that frozen word, she cry'd. 
Yet waking still she watch'd her strugling breast, 
And love's approaches were in vain address'd, 
'Till gentle sleep an easy conquest made, 
And in her soft embrace the conqueror was laid. 
But oh too soon the pleasing vision fled, 
And left her blushing on the conscious bed: 
Ah me! (she cry'd) how monstrous do I seem? 
Why these wild thoughts? and this incestuous dream? 
Envy herself ('tis true) must own his charms, 
But what is beauty in a sister's arms? 
Oh were I not that despicable she, 
How bless'd, how pleas'd, how happy shou'd I be! 
But unregarded now must bear my pain, 
And but in dreams, my wishes can obtain. 

O sea-born Goddess! with thy wanton boy! 
Was ever such a charming scene of joy? 
Such perfect bliss! such ravishing delight! 
Ne'er hid before in the kind shades of night. 
How pleas'd my heart! in what sweet raptures tost! 
Ev'n life it self in the soft combat lost, 
While breathless he on my heav'd bosom lay, 
And snatch'd the treasures of my soul away. 

If the bare fancy so affects my mind, 
How shou'd I rave if to the substance join'd? 
Oh, gentle Caunus! quit thy hated line, 
Or let thy parents be no longer mine! 
Oh that in common all things were enjoy'd, 
But those alone who have our hopes destroy'd. 
Were I a princess, thou an humble swain, 
The proudest kings shou'd rival thee in vain. 
It cannot be, alas! the dreadful ill 
Is fix'd by Fate, and he's my brother still. 
Hear me, ye Gods! I must have friends in Heav'n, 
For Jove himself was to a sister giv'n: 
But what are their prerogatives above, 
To the short liberties of human love? 
Fantastick thoughts! down, down, forbidden fires, 
Or instant death extinguish my desires. 
Strict virtue, then, with thy malicious leave, 
Without a crime I may a kiss receive: 
But say shou'd I in spight of laws comply, 
Yet cruel Caunus might himself deny, 
No pity take of an afflicted maid 
(For love's sweet game must be by couples play'd). 
Yet why shou'd youth, and charms like mine, despair? 
Such fears ne'er startled the Aeolian pair; 
No ties of blood could their full hopes destroy, 
They broke thro' all, for the prevailing joy; 
And who can tell but Caunus too may be 
Rack'd and tormented in his breast for me? 
Like me, to the extreamest anguish drove, 
Like me, just waking from a dream of love? 
But stay! Oh whither wou'd my fury run! 
What arguments I urge to be undone! 
Away fond Byblis, quench these guilty flames; 
Caunus thy love but as brother claims; 
Yet had he first been touch'd with love of me, 
The charming youth cou'd I despairing see? 
Oppress'd with grief, and dying by disdain? 
Ah no! too sure I shou'd have eas'd his pain! 
Since then, if Caunus ask'd me, it were done; 
Asking my self, what dangers can I run? 
But canst thou ask? and see that right betray'd, 
From Pyrrha down to thy whole sex convey'd? 
That self-denying gift we all enjoy, 
Of wishing to be won, yet seeming to be coy. 
Well then, for once, let a fond mistress woo; 
The force of love no custom can subdue; 
This frantick passion he by words shall know, 
Soft as the melting heart from whence they flow. 
The pencil then in her fair hand she held, 
By fear discourag'd, but by love compell'd 
She writes, then blots, writes on, and blots again, 
Likes it as fit, then razes it as vain: 
Shame, and assurance in her face appear, 
And a faint hope just yielding to despair; 
Sister was wrote, and blotted as a word 
Which she, and Caunus too (she hop'd) abhorr'd; 
But now resolv'd to be no more controul'd 
By scrup'lous virtue, thus her grief she told. 

Thy lover (gentle Caunus) wishes thee 
That health, which thou alone canst give to me. 
O charming youth! the gift I ask bestow, 
Ere thou the name of the fond writer know; 
To thee without a name I would be known, 
Since knowing that, my frailty I must own. 
Yet why shou'd I my wretched name conceal? 
When thousand instances my flames reveal: 
Wan looks, and weeping eyes have spoke my pain, 
And sighs discharg'd from my heav'd heart in vain; 
Had I not wish'd my passion might be seen, 
What cou'd such fondness and embraces mean? 
Such kisses too! (Oh heedless lovely boy) 
Without a crime no sister cou'd enjoy: 
Yet (tho' extreamest rage has rack'd my soul, 
And raging fires in my parch'd bosom roul) 
Be witness, Gods! how piously I strove, 
To rid my thoughts of this enchanting love. 
But who cou'd scape so fierce, and sure a dart, 
Aim'd at a tender, and defenceless heart? 
Alas! what maid cou'd suffer, I have born, 
Ere the dire secret from my breast was torn; 
To thee a helpless vanquish'd wretch I come, 
'Tis you alone can save, or give my doom; 
My life, or death this moment you may chuse. 
Yet think, oh think, no hated stranger sues, 
No foe; but one, alas! too near ally'd, 
And wishing still much nearer to be ty'd. 
The forms of decency let age debate, 
And virtue's rules by their cold morals state; 
Their ebbing joys give leisure to enquire, 
And blame those noble flights our youth inspire: 
Where Nature kindly summons let us go, 
Our sprightly years no bounds in love shou'd know, 
Shou'd feel no check of guilt, and fear no ill; 
Lovers, and Gods act all things at their will: 
We gain one blessing from our hated kin, 
Since our paternal freedom hides the sin; 
Uncensur'd in each other's arms we lye, 
Think then how easie to compleat our joy. 
Oh, pardon and oblige a blushing maid, 
Whose rage the pride of her vain sex betray'd; 
Nor let my tomb thus mournfully complain, 
Here Byblis lies, by her lov'd Caunus slain. 

Forc'd here to end, she with a falling tear 
Temper'd the pliant wax, which did the signet bear: 
The curious cypher was impress'd by art, 
But love had stamp'd one deeper in her heart; 
Her page, a youth of confidence, and skill, 
(Secret as night) stood waiting on her will; 
Sighing (she cry'd): Bear this, thou faithful boy, 
To my sweet partner in eternal joy: 
Here a long pause her secret guilt confess'd, 
And when at length she would have spoke the rest, 
Half the dear name lay bury'd in her breast. 

Thus as he listned to her vain command, 
Down fell the letter from her trembling hand. 
The omen shock'd her soul. Yet go, she cry'd; 
Can a request from Byblis be deny'd? 

To the Maeandrian youth this message's born, 
The half-read lines by his fierce rage were torn; 
Hence, hence, he cry'd, thou pandar to her lust, 
Bear hence the triumph of thy impious trust: 
Thy instant death will but divulge her shame, 
Or thy life's blood shou'd quench the guilty flame. 
Frighted, from threatning Caunus he withdrew, 
And with the dreadful news to his lost mistress flew. 
The sad repulse so struck the wounded fair, 
Her sense was bury'd in her wild despair; 
Pale was her visage, as the ghastly dead; 
And her scar'd soul from the sweet mansion fled; 
Yet with her life renew'd, her love returns, 
And faintly thus her cruel fate she mourns: 
'Tis just, ye Gods! was my false reason blind? 
To write a secret of this tender kind? 
With female craft I shou'd at first have strove, 
By dubious hints to sound his distant love; 
And try'd those useful, tho' dissembled, arts, 
Which women practise on disdainful hearts: 
I shou'd have watch'd whence the black storm might rise;

Ere I had trusted the unfaithful skies. 
Now on the rouling billows I am tost, 
And with extended sails, on the blind shelves am lost. 
Did not indulgent Heav'n my doom foretell, 
When from my hand the fatal letter fell? 
What madness seiz'd my soul? and urg'd me on 
To take the only course to be undone? 
I cou'd my self have told the moving tale 
With such alluring grace as must prevail; 
Then had his eyes beheld my blushing fears, 
My rising sighs, and my descending tears; 
Round his dear neck these arms I then had spread, 
And, if rejected, at his feet been dead: 
If singly these had not his thoughts inclin'd, 
Yet all united would have shock'd his mind. 
Perhaps, my careless page might be in fault, 
And in a luckless hour the fatal message brought; 
Business, and worldly thoughts might fill his breast, 
Sometimes ev'n love itself may be an irksome guest: 
He cou'd not else have treated me with scorn, 
For Caunus was not of a tygress born; 
Nor steel, nor adamant has fenc'd his heart; 
Like mine, 'tis naked to the burning dart. 

Away false fears! he must, he shall be mine; 
In death alone I will my claim resign; 
'Tis vain to wish my written crime unknown, 
And for my guilt much vainer to atone. 
Repuls'd and baffled, fiercer still she burns, 
And Caunus with disdain her impious love returns. 
He saw no end of her injurious flame, 
And fled his country to avoid the shame. 
Forsaken Byblis, who had hopes no more; 
Burst out in rage, and her loose robes she tore; 
With her fair hands she smote her tender breast, 
And to the wond'ring world her love confess'd; 
O'er hills and dales, o'er rocks and streams she flew, 
But still in vain did her wild lust pursue: 
Wearied at length, on the cold earth she fell, 
And now in tears alone could her sad story tell. 
Relenting Gods in pity fix'd her there, 
And to a fountain turn'd the weeping fair. 

The fame of this, perhaps, thro' Crete had flown: 
But Crete had newer wonders of her own, 
In Iphis chang'd; for, near the Gnossian bounds 
(As loud report the miracle resounds), 
At Phaestus dwelt a man of honest blood, 
But meanly born, and not so rich as good; 
Esteem'd, and lov'd by all the neighbourhood; 
Who to his wife, before the time assign'd 
For child-birth came, thus bluntly spoke his mind. 
If Heav'n, said Lygdus, will vouchsafe to hear, 
I have but two petitions to prefer; 
Short pains for thee, for me a son and heir. 
Girls cost as many throes in bringing forth; 
Beside, when born, the titts are little worth; 
Weak puling things, unable to sustain 
Their share of labour, and their bread to gain. 
If, therefore, thou a creature shalt produce, 
Of so great charges, and so little use 
(Bear witness, Heav'n, with what reluctancy), 
Her hapless innocence I doom to die. 
He said, and common tears the common grief display, 
Of him who bad, and her who must obey. 

Yet Telethusa still persists, to find 
Fit arguments to move a father's mind; 
T' extend his wishes to a larger scope, 
And in one vessel not confine his hope. 
Lygdus continues hard: her time drew near, 
And she her heavy load could scarcely bear; 
When slumbring, in the latter shades of night, 
Before th' approaches of returning light, 
She saw, or thought she saw, before her bed, 
A glorious train, and Isis at their head: 
Her moony horns were on her forehead plac'd, 
And yellow shelves her shining temples grac'd: 
A mitre, for a crown, she wore on high; 
The dog, and dappl'd bull were waiting by; 
Osyris, sought along the banks of Nile; 
The silent God: the sacred crocodile; 
And, last, a long procession moving on, 
With timbrels, that assist the lab'ring moon. 
Her slumbers seem'd dispell'd, and, broad awake, 
She heard a voice, that thus distinctly spake. 
My votary, thy babe from death defend, 
Nor fear to save whate'er the Gods will send. 
Delude with art thy husband's dire decree: 
When danger calls, repose thy trust on me: 
And know thou hast not serv'd a thankless deity. 
This promise made, with night the Goddess fled; 
With joy the woman wakes, and leaves her bed; 
Devoutly lifts her spotless hands on high, 
And prays the Pow'rs their gift to ratifie. 

Now grinding pains proceed to bearing throes, 
'Till its own weight the burden did disclose. 
'Twas of the beauteous kind, and brought to light 
With secrecy, to shun the father's sight. 
Th' indulgent mother did her care employ, 
And past it on her husband for a boy. 
The nurse was conscious of the fact alone; 
The father paid his vows as for a son; 
And call'd him Iphis, by a common name, 
Which either sex with equal right may claim. 
Iphis his grandsire was; the wife was pleas'd, 
Of half the fraud by Fortune's favour eas'd: 
The doubtful name was us'd without deceit, 
And truth was cover'd with a pious cheat. 
The habit show'd a boy, the beauteous face 
With manly fierceness mingled female grace. 

Now thirteen years of age were swiftly run, 
When the fond father thought the time drew on 
Of settling in the world his only son. 
Ianthe was his choice; so wondrous fair, 
Her form alone with Iphis cou'd compare; 
A neighbour's daughter of his own degree, 
And not more bless'd with Fortune's goods than he. 

They soon espous'd; for they with ease were join'd, 
Who were before contracted in the mind. 
Their age the same, their inclinations too; 
And bred together, in one school they grew. 
Thus, fatally dispos'd to mutual fires, 
They felt, before they knew, the same desires. 
Equal their flame, unequal was their care; 
One lov'd with hope, one languish'd in despair. 
The maid accus'd the lingring day alone: 
For whom she thought a man, she thought her own. 
But Iphis bends beneath a greater grief; 
As fiercely burns, but hopes for no relief. 
Ev'n her despair adds fuel to her fire; 
A maid with madness does a maid desire. 
And, scarce refraining tears, Alas, said she, 
What issue of my love remains for me! 
How wild a passion works within my breast, 
With what prodigious flames am I possest! 
Could I the care of Providence deserve, 
Heav'n must destroy me, if it would preserve. 
And that's my fate, or sure it would have sent 
Some usual evil for my punishment: 
Not this unkindly curse; to rage, and burn, 
Where Nature shews no prospect of return. 
Nor cows for cows consume with fruitless fire; 
Nor mares, when hot, their fellow-mares desire: 
The father of the fold supplies his ewes; 
The stag through secret woods his hind pursues; 
And birds for mates the males of their own species chuse.

Her females Nature guards from female flame, 
And joins two sexes to preserve the game: 
Wou'd I were nothing, or not what I am! 
Crete, fam'd for monsters, wanted of her store, 
'Till my new love produc'd one monster more. 
The daughter of the sun a bull desir'd, 
And yet ev'n then a male a female fir'd: 
Her passion was extravagantly new, 
But mine is much the madder of the two. 
To things impossible she was not bent, 
But found the means to compass her intent. 
To cheat his eyes she took a different shape; 
Yet still she gain'd a lover, and a leap. 
Shou'd all the wit of all the world conspire, 
Shou'd Daedalus assist my wild desire, 
What art can make me able to enjoy, 
Or what can change Ianthe to a boy? 
Extinguish then thy passion, hopeless maid, 
And recollect thy reason for thy aid. 
Know what thou art, and love as maidens ought, 
And drive these golden wishes from thy thought. 
Thou canst not hope thy fond desires to gain; 
Where hope is wanting, wishes are in vain. 

And yet no guards against our joys conspire; 
No jealous husband hinders our desire; 
My parents are propitious to my wish, 
And she herself consenting to the bliss. 
All things concur to prosper our design; 
All things to prosper any love but mine. 
And yet I never can enjoy the fair; 
'Tis past the pow'r of Heav'n to grant my pray'r. 
Heav'n has been kind, as far as Heav'n can be; 
Our parents with our own desires agree; 
But Nature, stronger than the Gods above, 
Refuses her assistance to my love; 
She sets the bar that causes all my pain; 
One gift refus'd, makes all their bounty vain. 
And now the happy day is just at hand, 
To bind our hearts in Hymen's holy band: 
Our hearts, but not our bodies: thus accurs'd, 
In midst of water I complain of thirst. 
Why com'st thou, Juno, to these barren rites, 
To bless a bed defrauded of delights? 
But why shou'd Hymen lift his torch on high, 
To see two brides in cold embraces lye? 

Thus love-sick Iphis her vain passion mourns; 
With equal ardour fair Ianthe burns, 
Invoking Hymen's name, and Juno's pow'r, 
To speed the work, and haste the happy hour. 

She hopes, while Telethusa fears the day, 
And strives to interpose some new delay: 
Now feigns a sickness, now is in a fright 
For this bad omen, or that boding sight. 
But having done whate'er she could devise, 
And empty'd all her magazine of lies, 
The time approach'd; the next ensuing day 
The fatal secret must to light betray. 
Then Telethusa had recourse to pray'r, 
She, and her daughter with dishevel'd hair; 
Trembling with fear, great Isis they ador'd, 
Embrac'd her altar, and her aid implor'd. 

Fair queen, who dost on fruitful Egypt smile, 
Who sway'st the sceptre of the Pharian isle, 
And sev'n-fold falls of disemboguing Nile, 
Relieve, in this our last distress, she said, 
A suppliant mother, and a mournful maid. 
Thou, Goddess, thou wert present to my sight; 
Reveal'd I saw thee by thy own fair light: 
I saw thee in my dream, as now I see, 
With all thy marks of awful majesty: 
The glorious train that compass'd thee around; 
And heard the hollow timbrels holy sound. 
Thy words I noted, which I still retain; 
Let not thy sacred oracles be vain. 
That Iphis lives, that I myself am free 
From shame, and punishment, I owe to thee. 
On thy protection all our hopes depend. 
Thy counsel sav'd us, let thy pow'r defend. 

Her tears pursu'd her words; and while she spoke, 
The Goddess nodded, and her altar shook: 
The temple doors, as with a blast of wind, 
Were heard to clap; the lunar horns that bind 
The brows of Isis cast a blaze around; 
The trembling timbrel made a murm'ring sound. 

Some hopes these happy omens did impart; 
Forth went the mother with a beating heart: 
Not much in fear, nor fully satisfy'd; 
But Iphis follow'd with a larger stride: 
The whiteness of her skin forsook her face; 
Her looks embolden'd with an awful grace; 
Her features, and her strength together grew, 
And her long hair to curling locks withdrew. 
Her sparkling eyes with manly vigour shone, 
Big was her voice, audacious was her tone. 
The latent parts, at length reveal'd, began 
To shoot, and spread, and burnish into man. 
The maid becomes a youth; no more delay 
Your vows, but look, and confidently pay. 
Their gifts the parents to the temple bear: 
The votive tables this inscription wear; 
Iphis the man, has to the Goddess paid 
The vows, that Iphis offer'd when a maid. 

Now when the star of day had shewn his face, 
Venus and Juno with their presence grace 
The nuptial rites, and Hymen from above 
Descending to compleat their happy love; 
The Gods of marriage lend their mutual aid; 
And the warm youth enjoys the lovely maid. 

Thence, in his saffron robe, for distant Thrace, 
Hymen departs, thro' air's unmeasur'd space; 
By Orpheus call'd, the nuptial Pow'r attends, 
But with ill-omen'd augury descends; 
Nor chearful look'd the God, nor prosp'rous spoke, 
Nor blaz'd his torch, but wept in hissing smoke. 
In vain they whirl it round, in vain they shake, 
No rapid motion can its flames awake. 
With dread these inauspicious signs were view'd, 
And soon a more disastrous end ensu'd; 
For as the bride, amid the Naiad train, 
Ran joyful, sporting o'er the flow'ry plain, 
A venom'd viper bit her as she pass'd; 
Instant she fell, and sudden breath'd her last. 

When long his loss the Thracian had deplor'd, 
Not by superior Pow'rs to be restor'd; 
Inflam'd by love, and urg'd by deep despair, 
He leaves the realms of light, and upper air; 
Daring to tread the dark Tenarian road, 
And tempt the shades in their obscure abode; 
Thro' gliding spectres of th' interr'd to go, 
And phantom people of the world below: 
Persephone he seeks, and him who reigns 
O'er ghosts, and Hell's uncomfortable plains. 
Arriv'd, he, tuning to his voice his strings, 
Thus to the king and queen of shadows sings. 

Ye Pow'rs, who under Earth your realms extend, 
To whom all mortals must one day descend; 
If here 'tis granted sacred truth to tell: 
I come not curious to explore your Hell; 
Nor come to boast (by vain ambition fir'd) 
How Cerberus at my approach retir'd. 
My wife alone I seek; for her lov'd sake 
These terrors I support, this journey take. 
She, luckless wandring, or by fate mis-led, 
Chanc'd on a lurking viper's crest to tread; 
The vengeful beast, enflam'd with fury, starts, 
And thro' her heel his deathful venom darts. 
Thus was she snatch'd untimely to her tomb; 
Her growing years cut short, and springing bloom. 
Long I my loss endeavour'd to sustain, 
And strongly strove, but strove, alas, in vain: 
At length I yielded, won by mighty love; 
Well known is that omnipotence above! 
But here, I doubt, his unfelt influence fails; 
And yet a hope within my heart prevails. 
That here, ev'n here, he has been known of old; 
At least if truth be by tradition told; 
If fame of former rapes belief may find, 
You both by love, and love alone, were join'd. 
Now, by the horrors which these realms surround; 
By the vast chaos of these depths profound; 
By the sad silence which eternal reigns 
O'er all the waste of these wide-stretching plains; 
Let me again Eurydice receive, 
Let Fate her quick-spun thread of life re-weave. 
All our possessions are but loans from you, 
And soon, or late, you must be paid your due; 
Hither we haste to human-kind's last seat, 
Your endless empire, and our sure retreat. 
She too, when ripen'd years she shall attain, 
Must, of avoidless right, be yours again: 
I but the transient use of that require, 
Which soon, too soon, I must resign entire. 
But if the destinies refuse my vow, 
And no remission of her doom allow; 
Know, I'm determin'd to return no more; 
So both retain, or both to life restore. 

Thus, while the bard melodiously complains, 
And to his lyre accords his vocal strains, 
The very bloodless shades attention keep, 
And silent, seem compassionate to weep; 
Ev'n Tantalus his flood unthirsty views, 
Nor flies the stream, nor he the stream pursues; 
Ixion's wond'ring wheel its whirl suspends, 
And the voracious vulture, charm'd, attends; 
No more the Belides their toil bemoan, 
And Sisiphus reclin'd, sits list'ning on his stone. 

Then first ('tis said) by sacred verse subdu'd, 
The Furies felt their cheeks with tears bedew'd: 
Nor could the rigid king, or queen of Hell, 
Th' impulse of pity in their hearts repell. 

Now, from a troop of shades that last arriv'd, 
Eurydice was call'd, and stood reviv'd: 
Slow she advanc'd, and halting seem to feel 
The fatal wound, yet painful in her heel. 
Thus he obtains the suit so much desir'd, 
On strict observance of the terms requir'd: 
For if, before he reach the realms of air, 
He backward cast his eyes to view the fair, 
The forfeit grant, that instant, void is made, 
And she for ever left a lifeless shade. 

Now thro' the noiseless throng their way they bend, 
And both with pain the rugged road ascend; 
Dark was the path, and difficult, and steep, 
And thick with vapours from the smoaky deep. 
They well-nigh now had pass'd the bounds of night, 
And just approach'd the margin of the light, 
When he, mistrusting lest her steps might stray, 
And gladsome of the glympse of dawning day, 
His longing eyes, impatient, backward cast 
To catch a lover's look, but look'd his last; 
For, instant dying, she again descends, 
While he to empty air his arms extends. 
Again she dy'd, nor yet her lord reprov'd; 
What could she say, but that too well he lov'd? 
One last farewell she spoke, which scarce he heard; 
So soon she drop'd, so sudden disappear'd. 

All stunn'd he stood, when thus his wife he view'd 
By second Fate, and double death subdu'd: 
Not more amazement by that wretch was shown, 
Whom Cerberus beholding, turn'd to stone; 
Nor Olenus cou'd more astonish'd look, 
When on himself Lethaea's fault he took, 
His beauteous wife, who too secure had dar'd 
Her face to vye with Goddesses compar'd: 
Once join'd by love, they stand united still, 
Turn'd to contiguous rocks on Ida's hill. 

Now to repass the Styx in vain he tries, 
Charon averse, his pressing suit denies. 
Sev'n days entire, along th' infernal shores, 
Disconsolate, the bard Eurydice deplores; 
Defil'd with filth his robe, with tears his cheeks, 
No sustenance but grief, and cares, he seeks: 
Of rigid Fate incessant he complains, 
And Hell's inexorable Gods arraigns. 
This ended, to high Rhodope he hastes, 
And Haemus' mountain, bleak with northern blasts. 

And now his yearly race the circling sun 
Had thrice compleat thro' wat'ry Pisces run, 
Since Orpheus fled the face of womankind, 
And all soft union with the sex declin'd. 
Whether his ill success this change had bred, 
Or binding vows made to his former bed; 
Whate'er the cause, in vain the nymphs contest, 
With rival eyes to warm his frozen breast: 
For ev'ry nymph with love his lays inspir'd, 
But ev'ry nymph repuls'd, with grief retir'd. 

A hill there was, and on that hill a mead, 
With verdure thick, but destitute of shade. 
Where, now, the Muse's son no sooner sings, 
No sooner strikes his sweet resounding strings. 
But distant groves the flying sounds receive, 
And list'ning trees their rooted stations leave; 
Themselves transplanting, all around they grow, 
And various shades their various kinds bestow. 
Here, tall Chaonian oaks their branches spread, 
While weeping poplars there erect their head. 
The foodful Esculus here shoots his leaves, 
That turf soft lime-tree, this, fat beach receives; 
Here, brittle hazels, lawrels here advance, 
And there tough ash to form the heroe's lance; 
Here silver firs with knotless trunks ascend, 
There, scarlet oaks beneath their acorns bend. 
That spot admits the hospitable plane, 
On this, the maple grows with clouded grain; 
Here, watry willows are with Lotus seen; 
There, tamarisk, and box for ever green. 
With double hue here mirtles grace the ground, 
And laurestines, with purple berries crown'd. 
With pliant feet, now, ivies this way wind, 
Vines yonder rise, and elms with vines entwin'd. 
Wild Ornus now, the pitch-tree next takes root, 
And Arbutus adorn'd with blushing fruit. 
Then easy-bending palms, the victor's prize, 
And pines erect with bristly tops arise. 
For Rhea grateful still the pine remains, 
For Atys still some favour she retains; 
He once in human shape her breast had warm'd, 
And now is cherish'd, to a tree transform'd. 

Amid the throng of this promiscuous wood, 
With pointed top, the taper cypress stood; 
A tree, which once a youth, and heav'nly fair, 
Was of that deity the darling care, 
Whose hand adapts, with equal skill, the strings 
To bows with which he kills, and harps to which he sings.

For heretofore, a mighty stag was bred, 
Which on the fertile fields of Caea fed; 
In shape and size he all his kind excell'd, 
And to Carthaean nymphs was sacred held. 
His beamy head, with branches high display'd, 
Afforded to itself an ample shade; 
His horns were gilt, and his smooth neck was grac'd 
With silver collars thick with gems enchas'd: 
A silver boss upon his forehead hung, 
And brazen pendants in his ear-rings rung. 
Frequenting houses, he familiar grew, 
And learnt by custom, Nature to subdue; 
'Till by degrees, of fear, and wildness, broke, 
Ev'n stranger hands his proffer'd neck might stroak. 

Much was the beast by Caea's youth caress'd, 
But thou, sweet Cyparissus, lov'dst him best: 
By thee, to pastures fresh, he oft was led, 
By thee oft water'd at the fountain's head: 
His horns with garlands, now, by thee were ty'd, 
And, now, thou on his back wou'dst wanton ride; 
Now here, now there wou'dst bound along the plains, 
Ruling his tender mouth with purple reins. 

'Twas when the summer sun, at noon of day, 
Thro' glowing Cancer shot his burning ray, 
'Twas then, the fav'rite stag, in cool retreat, 
Had sought a shelter from the scorching heat; 
Along the grass his weary limbs he laid, 
Inhaling freshness from the breezy shade: 
When Cyparissus with his pointed dart, 
Unknowing, pierc'd him to the panting heart. 
But when the youth, surpriz'd, his error found, 
And saw him dying of the cruel wound, 
Himself he would have slain thro' desp'rate grief: 
What said not Phoebus, that might yield relief! 
To cease his mourning, he the boy desir'd, 
Or mourn no more than such a loss requir'd. 
But he, incessant griev'd: at length address'd 
To the superior Pow'rs a last request; 
Praying, in expiation of his crime, 
Thenceforth to mourn to all succeeding time. 

And now, of blood exhausted he appears, 
Drain'd by a torrent of continual tears; 
The fleshy colour in his body fades, 
And a green tincture all his limbs invades; 
From his fair head, where curling locks late hung, 
A horrid bush with bristled branches sprung, 
Which stiffning by degrees, its stem extends, 
'Till to the starry skies the spire ascends. 

Apollo sad look'd on, and sighing, cry'd, 
Then, be for ever, what thy pray'r imply'd: 
Bemoan'd by me, in others grief excite; 
And still preside at ev'ry fun'ral rite. 

Thus the sweet artist in a wondrous shade 
Of verdant trees, which harmony had made, 
Encircled sate, with his own triumphs crown'd, 
Of listning birds, and savages around. 
Again the trembling strings he dext'rous tries, 
Again from discord makes soft musick rise. 
Then tunes his voice: O Muse, from whom I sprung, 
Jove be my theme, and thou inspire my song. 
To Jove my grateful voice I oft have rais'd, 
Oft his almighty pow'r with pleasure prais'd. 
I sung the giants in a solemn strain, 
Blasted, and thunder-struck on Phlegra's plain. 
Now be my lyre in softer accents mov'd, 
To sing of blooming boys by Gods belov'd; 
And to relate what virgins, void of shame, 
Have suffer'd vengeance for a lawless flame. 

The King of Gods once felt the burning joy, 
And sigh'd for lovely Ganimede of Troy: 
Long was he puzzled to assume a shape 
Most fit, and expeditious for the rape; 
A bird's was proper, yet he scorns to wear 
Any but that which might his thunder bear. 
Down with his masquerading wings he flies, 
And bears the little Trojan to the skies; 
Where now, in robes of heav'nly purple drest, 
He serves the nectar at th' Almighty's feast, 
To slighted Juno an unwelcome guest. 

Phoebus for thee too, Hyacinth, design'd 
A place among the Gods, had Fate been kind: 
Yet this he gave; as oft as wintry rains 
Are past, and vernal breezes sooth the plains, 
From the green turf a purple flow'r you rise, 
And with your fragrant breath perfume the skies. 

You when alive were Phoebus' darling boy; 
In you he plac'd his Heav'n, and fix'd his joy: 
Their God the Delphic priests consult in vain; 
Eurotas now he loves, and Sparta's plain: 
His hands the use of bow and harp forget, 
And hold the dogs, or bear the corded net; 
O'er hanging cliffs swift he pursues the game; 
Each hour his pleasure, each augments his flame. 

The mid-day sun now shone with equal light 
Between the past, and the succeeding night; 
They strip, then, smooth'd with suppling oyl, essay 
To pitch the rounded quoit, their wonted play: 
A well-pois'd disk first hasty Phoebus threw, 
It cleft the air, and whistled as it flew; 
It reach'd the mark, a most surprizing length; 
Which spoke an equal share of art, and strength. 
Scarce was it fall'n, when with too eager hand 
Young Hyacinth ran to snatch it from the sand; 
But the curst orb, which met a stony soil, 
Flew in his face with violent recoil. 
Both faint, both pale, and breathless now appear, 
The boy with pain, the am'rous God with fear. 
He ran, and rais'd him bleeding from the ground, 
Chafes his cold limbs, and wipes the fatal wound: 
Then herbs of noblest juice in vain applies; 
The wound is mortal, and his skill defies. 

As in a water'd garden's blooming walk, 
When some rude hand has bruis'd its tender stalk, 
A fading lilly droops its languid head, 
And bends to earth, its life, and beauty fled: 
So Hyacinth, with head reclin'd, decays, 
And, sickning, now no more his charms displays. 

O thou art gone, my boy, Apollo cry'd, 
Defrauded of thy youth in all its pride! 
Thou, once my joy, art all my sorrow now; 
And to my guilty hand my grief I owe. 
Yet from my self I might the fault remove, 
Unless to sport, and play, a fault should prove, 
Unless it too were call'd a fault to love. 
Oh cou'd I for thee, or but with thee, dye! 
But cruel Fates to me that pow'r deny. 
Yet on my tongue thou shalt for ever dwell; 
Thy name my lyre shall sound, my verse shall tell; 
And to a flow'r transform'd, unheard-of yet, 
Stamp'd on thy leaves my cries thou shalt repeat. 
The time shall come, prophetick I foreknow, 
When, joyn'd to thee, a mighty chief shall grow, 
And with my plaints his name thy leaf shall show. 

While Phoebus thus the laws of Fate reveal'd, 
Behold, the blood which stain'd the verdant field, 
Is blood no longer; but a flow'r full blown, 
Far brighter than the Tyrian scarlet shone. 
A lilly's form it took; its purple hue 
Was all that made a diff'rence to the view, 
Nor stop'd he here; the God upon its leaves 
The sad expression of his sorrow weaves; 
And to this hour the mournful purple wears 
Ai, Ai, inscrib'd in funeral characters. 
Nor are the Spartans, who so much are fam'd 
For virtue, of their Hyacinth asham'd; 
But still with pompous woe, and solemn state, 
The Hyacinthian feasts they yearly celebrate 

Enquire of Amathus, whose wealthy ground 
With veins of every metal does abound, 
If she to her Propoetides wou'd show, 
The honour Sparta does to him allow? 
Nor more, she'd say, such wretches wou'd we grace, 
Than those whose crooked horns deform'd their face, 
From thence Cerastae call'd, an impious race: 
Before whose gates a rev'rend altar stood, 
To Jove inscrib'd, the hospitable God: 
This had some stranger seen with gore besmear'd, 
The blood of lambs, and bulls it had appear'd: 
Their slaughter'd guests it was; nor flock nor herd. 

Venus these barb'rous sacrifices view'd 
With just abhorrence, and with wrath pursu'd: 
At first, to punish such nefarious crimes, 
Their towns she meant to leave, her once-lov'd climes: 
But why, said she, for their offence shou'd I 
My dear delightful plains, and cities fly? 
No, let the impious people, who have sinn'd, 
A punishment in death, or exile, find: 
If death, or exile too severe be thought, 
Let them in some vile shape bemoan their fault. 
While next her mind a proper form employs, 
Admonish'd by their horns, she fix'd her choice. 
Their former crest remains upon their heads, 
And their strong limbs an ox's shape invades. 

The blasphemous Propoetides deny'd 
Worship of Venus, and her pow'r defy'd: 
But soon that pow'r they felt, the first that sold 
Their lewd embraces to the world for gold. 
Unknowing how to blush, and shameless grown, 
A small transition changes them to stone. 

Pygmalion loathing their lascivious life, 
Abhorr'd all womankind, but most a wife: 
So single chose to live, and shunn'd to wed, 
Well pleas'd to want a consort of his bed. 
Yet fearing idleness, the nurse of ill, 
In sculpture exercis'd his happy skill; 
And carv'd in iv'ry such a maid, so fair, 
As Nature could not with his art compare, 
Were she to work; but in her own defence 
Must take her pattern here, and copy hence. 
Pleas'd with his idol, he commends, admires, 
Adores; and last, the thing ador'd, desires. 
A very virgin in her face was seen, 
And had she mov'd, a living maid had been: 
One wou'd have thought she cou'd have stirr'd, but strove

With modesty, and was asham'd to move. 
Art hid with art, so well perform'd the cheat, 
It caught the carver with his own deceit: 
He knows 'tis madness, yet he must adore, 
And still the more he knows it, loves the more: 
The flesh, or what so seems, he touches oft, 
Which feels so smooth, that he believes it soft. 
Fir'd with this thought, at once he strain'd the breast,

And on the lips a burning kiss impress'd. 
'Tis true, the harden'd breast resists the gripe, 
And the cold lips return a kiss unripe: 
But when, retiring back, he look'd again, 
To think it iv'ry, was a thought too mean: 
So wou'd believe she kiss'd, and courting more, 
Again embrac'd her naked body o'er; 
And straining hard the statue, was afraid 
His hands had made a dint, and hurt his maid: 
Explor'd her limb by limb, and fear'd to find 
So rude a gripe had left a livid mark behind: 
With flatt'ry now he seeks her mind to move, 
And now with gifts (the pow'rful bribes of love), 
He furnishes her closet first; and fills 
The crowded shelves with rarities of shells; 
Adds orient pearls, which from the conchs he drew, 
And all the sparkling stones of various hue: 
And parrots, imitating human tongue, 
And singing-birds in silver cages hung: 
And ev'ry fragrant flow'r, and od'rous green, 
Were sorted well, with lumps of amber laid between: 
Rich fashionable robes her person deck, 
Pendants her ears, and pearls adorn her neck: 
Her taper'd fingers too with rings are grac'd, 
And an embroider'd zone surrounds her slender waste. 
Thus like a queen array'd, so richly dress'd, 
Beauteous she shew'd, but naked shew'd the best. 
Then, from the floor, he rais'd a royal bed, 
With cov'rings of Sydonian purple spread: 
The solemn rites perform'd, he calls her bride, 
With blandishments invites her to his side; 
And as she were with vital sense possess'd, 
Her head did on a plumy pillow rest. 

The feast of Venus came, a solemn day, 
To which the Cypriots due devotion pay; 
With gilded horns the milk-white heifers led, 
Slaughter'd before the sacred altars, bled. 

Pygmalion off'ring, first approach'd the shrine, 
And then with pray'rs implor'd the Pow'rs divine: 
Almighty Gods, if all we mortals want, 
If all we can require, be yours to grant; 
Make this fair statue mine, he wou'd have said, 
But chang'd his words for shame; and only pray'd, 
Give me the likeness of my iv'ry maid. 

The golden Goddess, present at the pray'r, 
Well knew he meant th' inanimated fair, 
And gave the sign of granting his desire; 
For thrice in chearful flames ascends the fire. 
The youth, returning to his mistress, hies, 
And impudent in hope, with ardent eyes, 
And beating breast, by the dear statue lies. 
He kisses her white lips, renews the bliss, 
And looks, and thinks they redden at the kiss; 
He thought them warm before: nor longer stays, 
But next his hand on her hard bosom lays: 
Hard as it was, beginning to relent, 
It seem'd, the breast beneath his fingers bent; 
He felt again, his fingers made a print; 
'Twas flesh, but flesh so firm, it rose against the dint:

The pleasing task he fails not to renew; 
Soft, and more soft at ev'ry touch it grew; 
Like pliant wax, when chasing hands reduce 
The former mass to form, and frame for use. 
He would believe, but yet is still in pain, 
And tries his argument of sense again, 
Presses the pulse, and feels the leaping vein. 
Convinc'd, o'erjoy'd, his studied thanks, and praise, 
To her, who made the miracle, he pays: 
Then lips to lips he join'd; now freed from fear, 
He found the savour of the kiss sincere: 
At this the waken'd image op'd her eyes, 
And view'd at once the light, and lover with surprize. 
The Goddess, present at the match she made, 
So bless'd the bed, such fruitfulness convey'd, 
That ere ten months had sharpen'd either horn, 
To crown their bliss, a lovely boy was born; 
Paphos his name, who grown to manhood, wall'd 
The city Paphos, from the founder call'd. 

Nor him alone produc'd the fruitful queen; 
But Cinyras, who like his sire had been 
A happy prince, had he not been a sire. 
Daughters, and fathers, from my song retire; 
I sing of horror; and could I prevail, 
You shou'd not hear, or not believe my tale. 
Yet if the pleasure of my song be such, 
That you will hear, and credit me too much, 
Attentive listen to the last event, 
And, with the sin, believe the punishment: 
Since Nature cou'd behold so dire a crime, 
I gratulate at least my native clime, 
That such a land, which such a monster bore, 
So far is distant from our Thracian shore. 
Let Araby extol her happy coast, 
Her cinamon, and sweet Amomum boast, 
Her fragrant flow'rs, her trees with precious tears, 
Her second harvests, and her double years; 
How can the land be call'd so bless'd, that Myrrha bears?

Nor all her od'rous tears can cleanse her crime; 
Her Plant alone deforms the happy clime: 
Cupid denies to have inflam'd thy heart, 
Disowns thy love, and vindicates his dart: 
Some Fury gave thee those infernal pains, 
And shot her venom'd vipers in thy veins. 
To hate thy sire, had merited a curse; 
But such an impious love deserv'd a worse. 
The neighb'ring monarchs, by thy beauty led, 
Contend in crowds, ambitious of thy bed: 
The world is at thy choice; except but one, 
Except but him, thou canst not chuse, alone. 
She knew it too, the miserable maid, 
Ere impious love her better thoughts betray'd, 
And thus within her secret soul she said: 
Ah Myrrha! whither wou'd thy wishes tend? 
Ye Gods, ye sacred laws, my soul defend 
From such a crime as all mankind detest, 
And never lodg'd before in human breast! 
But is it sin? Or makes my mind alone 
Th' imagin'd sin? For Nature makes it none. 
What tyrant then these envious laws began, 
Made not for any other beast, but Man! 
The father-bull his daughter may bestride, 
The horse may make his mother-mare a bride; 
What piety forbids the lusty ram, 
Or more salacious goat, to rut their dam? 
The hen is free to wed the chick she bore, 
And make a husband, whom she hatch'd before. 
All creatures else are of a happier kind, 
Whom nor ill-natur'd laws from pleasure bind, 
Nor thoughts of sin disturb their peace of mind. 
But Man a slave of his own making lives; 
The fool denies himself what Nature gives: 
Too-busie senates, with an over-care, 
To make us better than our kind can bear, 
Have dash'd a spice of envy in the laws, 
And straining up too high, have spoil'd the cause. 
Yet some wise nations break their cruel chains, 
And own no laws, but those which love ordains; 
Where happy daughters with their sires are join'd, 
And piety is doubly paid in kind. 
O that I had been born in such a clime, 
Not here, where 'tis the country makes the crime! 
But whither wou'd my impious fancy stray? 
Hence hopes, and ye forbidden thoughts away! 
His worth deserves to kindle my desires, 
But with the love, that daughters bear to sires. 
Then had not Cinyras my father been, 
What hinder'd Myrrha's hopes to be his queen? 
But the perverseness of my fate is such, 
That he's not mine, because he's mine too much: 
Our kindred-blood debars a better tie; 
He might be nearer, were he not so nigh. 
Eyes, and their objects, never must unite; 
Some distance is requir'd to help the sight: 
Fain wou'd I travel to some foreign shore, 
Never to see my native country more, 
So might I to my self my self restore; 
So might my mind these impious thoughts remove, 
And ceasing to behold, might cease to love. 
But stay I must, to feed my famish'd sight, 
To talk, to kiss, and more, if more I might: 
More, impious maid! What more canst thou design? 
To make a monstrous mixture in thy line, 
And break all statutes human and divine! 
Can'st thou be call'd (to save thy wretched life) 
Thy mother's rival, and thy father's wife? 
Confound so many sacred names in one, 
Thy brother's mother! Sister to thy son! 
And fear'st thou not to see th' infernal bands, 
Their heads with snakes; with torches arm'd their hands 
Full at thy face th' avenging brands to bear, 
And shake the serpents from their hissing hair; 
But thou in time th' increasing ill controul, 
Nor first debauch the body by the soul; 
Secure the sacred quiet of thy mind, 
And keep the sanctions Nature has design'd. 
Suppose I shou'd attempt, th' attempt were vain, 
No thoughts like mine, his sinless soul profane; 
Observant of the right: and o that he 
Cou'd cure my madness, or be mad like me! 
Thus she: but Cinyras, who daily sees 
A crowd of noble suitors at his knees, 
Among so many, knew not whom to chuse, 
Irresolute to grant, or to refuse. 
But having told their names, enquir'd of her 
Who pleas'd her best, and whom she would prefer. 
The blushing maid stood silent with surprize, 
And on her father fix'd her ardent eyes, 
And looking sigh'd, and as she sigh'd, began 
Round tears to shed, that scalded as they ran. 
The tender sire, who saw her blush, and cry, 
Ascrib'd it all to maiden modesty, 
And dry'd the falling drops, and yet more kind, 
He stroak'd her cheeks, and holy kisses join'd. 
She felt a secret venom fire her blood, 
And found more pleasure, than a daughter shou'd; 
And, ask'd again what lover of the crew 
She lik'd the best, she answer'd, One like you. 
Mistaking what she meant, her pious will 
He prais'd, and bid her so continue still: 
The word of pious heard, she blush'd with shame 
Of secret guilt, and cou'd not bear the name. 

'Twas now the mid of night, when slumbers close 
Our eyes, and sooth our cares with soft repose; 
But no repose cou'd wretched Myrrha find, 
Her body rouling, as she roul'd her mind: 
Mad with desire, she ruminates her sin, 
And wishes all her wishes o'er again: 
Now she despairs, and now resolves to try; 
Wou'd not, and wou'd again, she knows not why; 
Stops, and returns; makes, and retracts the vow; 
Fain wou'd begin, but understands not how. 
As when a pine is hew'd upon the plains, 
And the last mortal stroke alone remains, 
Lab'ring in pangs of death, and threatning all, 
This way, and that she nods, consid'ring where to fall: 
So Myrrha's mind, impell'd on either side, 
Takes ev'ry bent, but cannot long abide; 
Irresolute on which she shou'd relie, 
At last, unfix'd in all, is only fix'd to die. 
On that sad thought she rests, resolv'd on death, 
She rises, and prepares to choak her breath: 
Then while about the beam her zone she ties, 
Dear Cinyras farewell, she softly cries; 
For thee I die, and only wish to be 
Not hated, when thou know'st die I for thee: 
Pardon the crime, in pity to the cause: 
This said, about her neck the noose she draws. 
The nurse, who lay without, her faithful guard, 
Though not the words, the murmurs over-heard; 
And sighs, and hollow sounds: surpriz'd with fright, 
She starts, and leaves her bed, and springs a light; 
Unlocks the door, and entring out of breath, 
The dying saw, and instruments of death; 
She shrieks, she cuts the zone with trembling haste, 
And in her arms her fainting charge embrac'd: 
Next (for she now had leisure for her tears), 
She weeping ask'd, in these her blooming years, 
What unforeseen misfortune caus'd her care, 
To loath her life, and languish in despair! 
The maid, with down-cast eyes, and mute with grief 
For death unfinish'd, and ill-tim'd relief, 
Stood sullen to her suit: the beldame press'd 
The more to know, and bar'd her wither'd breast, 
Adjur'd her by the kindly food she drew 
From those dry founts, her secret ill to shew. 
Sad Myrrha sigh'd, and turn'd her eyes aside: 
The nurse still urg'd, and wou'd not be deny'd: 
Nor only promis'd secresie, but pray'd 
She might have leave to give her offer'd aid. 
Good-will, she said, my want of strength supplies, 
And diligence shall give what age denies: 
If strong desires thy mind to fury move, 
With charms and med'cines I can cure thy love: 
If envious eyes their hurtuful rays have cast, 
More pow'rful verse shall free thee from the blast: 
If Heav'n offended sends thee this disease, 
Offended Heav'n with pray'rs we can appease. 
What then remains, that can these cares procure? 
Thy house is flourishing, thy fortune sure: 
Thy careful mother yet in health survives, 
And, to thy comfort, thy kind father lives. 
The virgin started at her father's name, 
And sigh'd profoundly, conscious of the shame 
Nor yet the nurse her impious love divin'd, 
But yet surmis'd that love disturb'd her mind: 
Thus thinking, she pursu'd her point, and laid, 
And lull'd within her lap the mourning maid; 
Then softly sooth'd her thus; I guess your grief: 
You love, my child; your love shall find relief. 
My long-experienc'd age shall be your guide; 
Rely on that, and lay distrust aside. 
No breath of air shall on the secret blow, 
Nor shall (what most you fear) your father know. 
Struck once again, as with a thunder-clap, 
The guilty virgin bounded from her lap, 
And threw her body prostrate on the bed. 
And, to conceal her blushes, hid her head; 
There silent lay, and warn'd her with her hand 
To go: but she receiv'd not the command; 
Remaining still importunate to know: 
Then Myrrha thus: Or ask no more, or go; 
I pr'ythee go, or staying spare my shame; 
What thou would'st hear, is impious ev'n to name. 
At this, on high the beldame holds her hands, 
And trembling both with age, and terror stands; 
Adjures, and falling at her feet intreats, 
Sooths her with blandishments, and frights with threats,

To tell the crime intended, or disclose 
What part of it she knew, if she no farther knows. 
And last, if conscious to her counsel made, 
Confirms anew the promise of her aid. 
Now Myrrha rais'd her head; but soon oppress'd 
With shame, reclin'd it on her nurse's breast; 
Bath'd it with tears, and strove to have confess'd: 
Twice she began, and stopp'd; again she try'd; 
The falt'ring tongue its office still deny'd. 
At last her veil before her face she spread, 
And drew a long preluding sigh, and said, 
O happy mother, in thy marriage-bed! 
Then groan'd, and ceas'd. The good old woman shook, 
Stiff were her eyes, and ghastly was her look: 
Her hoary hair upright with horror stood, 
Made (to her grief) more knowing than she wou'd. 
Much she reproach'd, and many things she said, 
To cure the madness of th' unhappy maid, 
In vain: for Myrrha stood convict of ill; 
Her reason vanquish'd, but unchang'd her will: 
Perverse of mind, unable to reply; 
She stood resolv'd, or to possess, or die. 
At length the fondness of a nurse prevail'd 
Against her better sense, and virtue fail'd: 
Enjoy, my child, since such is thy desire, 
Thy love, she said; she durst not say, thy sire: 
Live, though unhappy, live on any terms; 
Then with a second oath her faith confirms. 

The solemn feast of Ceres now was near, 
When long white linnen stoles the matrons wear; 
Rank'd in procession walk the pious train, 
Off'ring first-fruits, and spikes of yellow grain: 
For nine long nights the nuptial-bed they shun, 
And sanctifying harvest, lie alone. 

Mix'd with the crowd, the queen forsook her lord, 
And Ceres' pow'r with secret rites ador'd: 
The royal couch, now vacant for a time, 
The crafty crone, officious in her crime, 
The first occasion took: the king she found 
Easie with wine, and deep in pleasures drown'd, 
Prepar'd for love: the beldame blew the flame, 
Confess'd the passion, but conceal'd the name. 
Her form she prais'd; the monarch ask'd her years; 
And she reply'd, The same thy Myrrha bears. 
Wine, and commended beauty fir'd his thought; 
Impatient, he commands her to be brought. 
Pleas'd with her charge perform'd, she hies her home, 
And gratulates the nymph, the task was overcome. 
Myrrha was joy'd the welcome news to hear; 
But clog'd with guilt, the joy was unsincere: 
So various, so discordant is the mind, 
That in our will a diff'rent will we find. 
Ill she presag'd, and yet pursu'd her lust; 
For guilty pleasures give a double gust. 

'Twas depth of night: Arctophylax had driv'n 
His lazy wain half round the northern Heav'n, 
When Myrrha hasten'd to the crime desir'd: 
The moon beheld her first, and first retir'd: 
The stars amaz'd, ran backward from the sight, 
And (shrunk within their sockets) lost their light. 
Icarius first withdraws his holy flame: 
The virgin sign, in Heav'n the second name, 
Slides down the belt, and from her station flies, 
And night with sable clouds involves the skies. 
Bold Myrrha still pursues her black intent; 
She stumbled thrice (an omen of th' event); 
Thrice shriek'd the fun'ral owl, yet on she went, 
Secure of shame, because secure of sight; 
Ev'n bashful sins are impudent by night. 
Link'd hand in hand, th' accomplice, and the dame, 
Their way exploring, to the chamber came: 
The door was ope; they blindly grope their way, 
Where dark in bed th' expecting monarch lay. 
Thus far her courage held, but here forsakes; 
Her faint knees knock at ev'ry step she makes. 
The nearer to her crime, the more within 
She feels remorse, and horror of her sin; 
Repents too late her criminal desire, 
And wishes, that unknown she could retire. 
Her lingring thus, the nurse (who fear'd delay 
The fatal secret might at length betray) 
Pull'd forward, to compleat the work begun, 
And said to Cinyras, Receive thy own. 
Thus saying, she deliver'd kind to kind, 
Accurs'd, and their devoted bodies join'd. 
The sire, unknowing of the crime, admits 
His bowels, and prophanes the hallow'd sheets; 
He found she trembled, but believ'd she strove 
With maiden modesty against her love, 
And sought with flatt'ring words vain fancies to remove.

Perhaps he said, My daughter, cease thy fears 
(Because the title suited with her years); 
And, Father, she might whisper him again, 
That names might not be wanting to the sin. 

Full of her sire, she left th' incestuous bed, 
And carry'd in her womb the crime she bred. 
Another, and another night she came; 
For frequent sin had left no sense of shame: 
'Till Cinyras desir'd to see her face, 
Whose body he had held in close embrace, 
And brought a taper; the revealer, light, 
Expos'd both crime, and criminal to sight. 
Grief, rage, amazement, could no speech afford, 
But from the sheath he drew th' avenging sword: 
The guilty fled: the benefit of night, 
That favour'd first the sin, secur'd the flight. 
Long wand'ring thro' the spacious fields, she bent 
Her voyage to th' Arabian continent; 
Then pass'd the region which Panchaea join'd, 
And flying, left the palmy plains behind. 
Nine times the moon had mew'd her horns; at length 
With travel weary, unsupply'd with strength, 
And with the burden of her womb oppress'd, 
Sabaean fields afford her needful rest: 
There, loathing life, and yet of death afraid, 
In anguish of her spirit, thus she pray'd: 
Ye Pow'rs, if any so propitious are 
T' accept my penitence, and hear my pray'r; 
Your judgments, I confess, are justly sent; 
Great sins deserve as great a punishment: 
Yet since my life the living will profane, 
And since my death the happy dead will stain, 
A middle state your mercy may bestow, 
Betwixt the realms above, and those below: 
Some other form to wretched Myrrha give, 
Nor let her wholly die, nor wholly live. 

The pray'rs of penitents are never vain; 
At least she did her last request obtain: 
For while she spoke, the ground began to rise, 
And gather'd round her feet, her legs, and thighs; 
Her toes in roots descend, and spreading wide, 
A firm foundation for the trunk provide: 
Her solid bones convert to solid wood, 
To pith her marrow, and to sap her blood: 
Her arms are boughs, her fingers change their kind, 
Her tender skin is harden'd into rind. 
And now the rising tree her womb invests, 
Now shooting upwards still, invades her breasts, 
And shades the neck; when weary with delay, 
She sunk her head within, and met it half the way. 
And tho' with outward shape she lost her sense, 
With bitter tears she wept her last offence; 
And still she weeps, nor sheds her tears in vain; 
For still the precious drops her name retain. 
Mean-time the mis-begotten infant grows, 
And ripe for birth, distends with deadly throes 
The swelling rind, with unavailing strife, 
To leave the wooden womb, and pushes into life. 
The mother-tree, as if oppress'd with pain, 
Writhes here, and there, to break the bark, in vain; 
And, like a lab'ring woman, wou'd have pray'd, 
But wants a voice to call Lucina's aid: 
The bending bole sends out a hollow sound, 
And trickling tears fall thicker on the ground. 
The mild Lucina came uncall'd, and stood 
Beside the struggling boughs, and heard the groaning wood;

Then reach'd her midwife-hand to speed the throes, 
And spoke the pow'rful spells, that babes to birth disclose.

The bark divides, the living load to free, 
And safe delivers the convulsive tree. 
The ready nymphs receive the crying child, 
And wash him in the tears the parent plant distill'd. 
They swath'd him with their scarfs; beneath him spread 
The ground with herbs; with roses rais'd his head. 
The lovely babe was born with ev'ry grace, 
Ev'n envy must have prais'd so fair a face: 
Such was his form, as painters when they show 
Their utmost art, on naked loves bestow: 
And that their arms no diff'rence might betray, 
Give him a bow, or his from Cupid take away. 
Time glides along with undiscover'd haste, 
The future but a length behind the past; 
So swift are years. The babe, whom just before 
His grandsire got, and whom his sister bore; 
The drop, the thing, which late the tree inclos'd, 
And late the yawning bark to life expos'd; 
A babe, a boy, a beauteous youth appears, 
And lovelier than himself at riper years. 
Now to the queen of love he gave desires, 
And, with her pains, reveng'd his mother's fires. 

For Cytherea's lips while Cupid prest, 
He with a heedless arrow raz'd her breast, 
The Goddess felt it, and with fury stung, 
The wanton mischief from her bosom flung: 
Yet thought at first the danger slight, but found 
The dart too faithful, and too deep the wound. 
Fir'd with a mortal beauty, she disdains 
To haunt th' Idalian mount, or Phrygian plains. 
She seeks not Cnidos, nor her Paphian shrines, 
Nor Amathus, that teems with brazen mines: 
Ev'n Heav'n itself with all its sweets unsought, 
Adonis far a sweeter Heav'n is thought. 
On him she hangs, and fonds with ev'ry art, 
And never, never knows from him to part. 
She, whose soft limbs had only been display'd 
On rosie beds beneath the myrtle shade, 
Whose pleasing care was to improve each grace, 
And add more charms to an unrival'd face, 
Now buskin'd, like the virgin huntress, goes 
Thro' woods, and pathless wilds, and mountain-snows 
With her own tuneful voice she joys to cheer 
The panting hounds, that chace the flying deer. 
She runs the labyrinth of fearful hares, 
But fearless beasts, and dang'rous prey forbears, 
Hunts not the grinning wolf, or foamy boar, 
And trembles at the lion's hungry roar. 
Thee too, Adonis, with a lover's care 
She warns, if warn'd thou wou'dst avoid the snare, 
To furious animals advance not nigh, 
Fly those that follow, follow those that fly; 
'Tis chance alone must the survivors save, 
Whene'er brave spirits will attempt the brave. 
O! lovely youth! in harmless sports delight; 
Provoke not beasts, which, arm'd by Nature, fight. 
For me, if not thy self, vouchsafe to fear; 
Let not thy thirst of glory cost me dear. 
Boars know not bow to spare a blooming age; 
No sparkling eyes can sooth the lion's rage. 
Not all thy charms a savage breast can move, 
Which have so deeply touch'd the queen of love. 
When bristled boars from beaten thickets spring, 
In grinded tusks a thunderbolt they bring. 
The daring hunters lions rouz'd devour, 
Vast is their fury, and as vast their pow'r: 
Curst be their tawny race! If thou would'st hear 
What kindled thus my hate, then lend an ear: 
The wond'rous tale I will to thee unfold, 
How the fell monsters rose from crimes of old. 
But by long toils I faint: see! wide-display'd, 
A grateful poplar courts us with a shade. 
The grassy turf, beneath, so verdant shows, 
We may secure delightfully repose. 
With her Adonis here be Venus blest; 
And swift at once the grass and him she prest. 
Then sweetly smiling, with a raptur'd mind, 
On his lov'd bosom she her head reclin'd, 
And thus began; but mindful still of bliss, 
Seal'd the soft accents with a softer kiss. 

Perhaps thou may'st have heard a virgin's name, 
Who still in swiftness swiftest youths o'ercame. 
Wondrous! that female weakness should outdo 
A manly strength; the wonder yet is true. 
'Twas doubtful, if her triumphs in the field 
Did to her form's triumphant glories yield; 
Whether her face could with more ease decoy 
A crowd of lovers, or her feet destroy. 
For once Apollo she implor'd to show 
If courteous Fates a consort would allow: 
A consort brings thy ruin, he reply'd; 
O! learn to want the pleasures of a bride! 
Nor shalt thou want them to thy wretched cost, 
And Atalanta living shall be lost. 
With such a rueful Fate th' affrighted maid 
Sought green recesses in the wood-land glade. 
Nor sighing suiters her resolves could move, 
She bad them show their speed, to show their love. 
He only, who could conquer in the race, 
Might hope the conquer'd virgin to embrace; 
While he, whose tardy feet had lagg'd behind, 
Was doom'd the sad reward of death to find. 
Tho' great the prize, yet rigid the decree, 
But blind with beauty, who can rigour see? 
Ev'n on these laws the fair they rashly sought, 
And danger in excess of love forgot. 

There sat Hippomenes, prepar'd to blame 
In lovers such extravagance of flame. 
And must, he said, the blessing of a wife 
Be dearly purchas'd by a risk of life? 
But when he saw the wonders of her face, 
And her limbs naked, springing to the race, 
Her limbs, as exquisitely turn'd, as mine, 
Or if a woman thou, might vie with thine, 
With lifted hands, he cry'd, forgive the tongue 
Which durst, ye youths, your well-tim'd courage wrong. 
I knew not that the nymph, for whom you strove, 
Deserv'd th' unbounded transports of your love. 
He saw, admir'd, and thus her spotless frame 
He prais'd, and praising, kindled his own flame. 
A rival now to all the youths who run, 
Envious, he fears they should not be undone. 
But why (reflects he) idly thus is shown 
The fate of others, yet untry'd my own? 
The coward must not on love's aid depend; 
The God was ever to the bold a friend. 
Mean-time the virgin flies, or seems to fly, 
Swift as a Scythian arrow cleaves the sky: 
Still more and more the youth her charms admires. 
The race itself t' exalt her charms conspires. 
The golden pinions, which her feet adorn, 
In wanton flutt'rings by the winds are born. 
Down from her head, the long, fair tresses flow, 
And sport with lovely negligence below. 
The waving ribbands, which her buskins tie, 
Her snowy skin with waving purple die; 
As crimson veils in palaces display'd, 
To the white marble lend a blushing shade. 
Nor long he gaz'd, yet while he gaz'd, she gain'd 
The goal, and the victorious wreath obtain'd. 
The vanquish'd sigh, and, as the law decreed, 
Pay the dire forfeit, and prepare to bleed. 

Then rose Hippomenes, not yet afraid, 
And fix'd his eyes full on the beauteous maid. 
Where is (he cry'd) the mighty conquest won, 
To distance those, who want the nerves to run? 
Here prove superior strength, nor shall it be 
Thy loss of glory, if excell'd by me. 
High my descent, near Neptune I aspire, 
For Neptune was grand-parent to my sire. 
From that great God the fourth my self I trace, 
Nor sink my virtues yet beneath my race. 
Thou from Hippomenes, o'ercome, may'st claim 
An envy'd triumph, and a deathless fame. 

While thus the youth the virgin pow'r defies, 
Silent she views him still with softer eyes. 
Thoughts in her breast a doubtful strife begin, 
If 'tis not happier now to lose, than win. 
What God, a foe to beauty, would destroy 
The promis'd ripeness of this blooming boy? 
With his life's danger does he seek my bed? 
Scarce am I half so greatly worth, she said. 
Nor has his beauty mov'd my breast to love, 
And yet, I own, such beauty well might move: 
'Tis not his charms, 'tis pity would engage 
My soul to spare the greenness of his age. 
What, that heroick conrage fires his breast, 
And shines thro' brave disdain of Fate confest? 
What, that his patronage by close degrees 
Springs from th' imperial ruler of the seas? 
Then add the love, which bids him undertake 
The race, and dare to perish for my sake. 
Of bloody nuptials, heedless youth, beware! 
Fly, timely fly from a too barb'rous fair. 
At pleasure chuse; thy love will be repaid 
By a less foolish, and more beauteous maid. 
But why this tenderness, before unknown? 
Why beats, and pants my breast for him alone? 
His eyes have seen his num'rous rivals yield; 
Let him too share the rigour of the field, 
Since, by their fates untaught, his own he courts, 
And thus with ruin insolently sports. 
Yet for what crime shall he his death receive? 
Is it a crime with me to wish to live? 
Shall his kind passion his destruction prove? 
Is this the fatal recompence of love? 
So fair a youth, destroy'd, would conquest shame, 
Aud nymphs eternally detest my fame. 
Still why should nymphs my guiltless fame upbraid? 
Did I the fond adventurer persuade? 
Alas! I wish thou would'st the course decline, 
Or that my swiftness was excell'd by thine. 
See! what a virgin's bloom adorns the boy! 
Why wilt thou run, and why thy self destroy? 
Hippomenes! O that I ne'er had been 
By those bright eyes unfortunately seen! 
Ah! tempt not thus a swift, untimely Fate; 
Thy life is worthy of the longest date. 
Were I less wretched, did the galling chain 
Of rigid Gods not my free choice restrain, 
By thee alone I could with joy be led 
To taste the raptures of a nuptial bed. 

Thus she disclos'd the woman's secret heart, 
Young, innocent, and new to Cupid's dart. 
Her thoughts, her words, her actions wildly rove, 
With love she burns, yet knows not that 'tis love. 

Her royal sire now with the murm'ring crowd 
Demands the race impatiently aloud. 
Hippomenes then with true fervour pray'd, 
My bold attempt let Venus kindly aid. 
By her sweet pow'r I felt this am'rous fire, 
Still may she succour, whom she did inspire. 
A soft, unenvious wind, with speedy care, 
Wafted to Heav'n the lover's tender pray'r. 
Pity, I own, soon gain'd the wish'd consent, 
And all th' assistance he implor'd I lent. 
The Cyprian lands, tho' rich, in richness yield 
To that, surnam'd the Tamasenian field. 
That field of old was added to my shrine, 
And its choice products consecrated mine. 
A tree there stands, full glorious to behold, 
Gold are the leafs, the crackling branches gold. 
It chanc'd, three apples in my hand I bore, 
Which newly from the tree I sportive tore; 
Seen by the youth alone, to him I brought 
The fruit, and when, and how to use it, taught. 
The signal sounding by the king's command, 
Both start at once, and sweep th' imprinted sand. 
So swiftly mov'd their feet, they might with ease, 
Scarce moisten'd, skim along the glassy seas; 
Or with a wondrous levity be born 
O'er yellow harvests of unbending corn. 
Now fav'ring peals resound from ev'ry part, 
Spirit the youth, and fire his fainting heart. 
Hippomenes! (they cry'd) thy life preserve, 
Intensely labour, and stretch ev'ry nerve. 
Base fear alone can baffle thy design, 
Shoot boldly onward, and the goal is thine. 
'Tis doubtful whether shouts, like these, convey'd 
More pleasures to the youth, or to the maid. 
When a long distance oft she could have gain'd, 
She check'd her swiftness, and her feet restrain'd: 
She sigh'd, and dwelt, and languish'd on his face, 
Then with unwilling speed pursu'd the race. 
O'er-spent with heat, his breath he faintly drew, 
Parch'd was his mouth, nor yet the goal in view, 
And the first apple on the plain he threw. 
The nymph stop'd sudden at th' unusual sight, 
Struck with the fruit so beautifully bright. 
Aside she starts, the wonder to behold, 
And eager stoops to catch the rouling gold. 
Th' observant youth past by, and scour'd along, 
While peals of joy rung from th' applauding throng. 
Unkindly she corrects the short delay, 
And to redeem the time fleets swift away, 
Swift, as the lightning, or the northern wind, 
And far she leaves the panting youth behind. 
Again he strives the flying nymph to hold 
With the temptation of the second gold: 
The bright temptation fruitlessly was tost, 
So soon, alas! she won the distance lost. 
Now but a little interval of space 
Remain'd for the decision of the race. 
Fair author of the precious gift, he said, 
Be thou, O Goddess, author of my aid! 
Then of the shining fruit the last he drew, 
And with his full-collected vigour threw: 
The virgin still the longer to detain, 
Threw not directly, but a-cross the plain. 
She seem'd a-while perplex'd in dubious thought, 
If the far-distant apple should be sought: 
I lur'd her backward mind to seize the bait, 
And to the massie gold gave double weight. 
My favour to my votary was show'd, 
Her speed I lessen'd, and encreas'd her load. 
But lest, tho' long, the rapid race be run, 
Before my longer, tedious tale is done, 
The youth the goal, and so the virgin won. 

Might I, Adonis, now not hope to see 
His grateful thanks pour'd out for victory? 
His pious incense on my altars laid? 
But he nor grateful thanks, nor incense paid. 
Enrag'd I vow'd, that with the youth the fair, 
For his contempt, should my keen vengeance share; 
That future lovers might my pow'r revere, 
And, from their sad examples, learn to fear. 
The silent fanes, the sanctify'd abodes, 
Of Cybele, great mother of the Gods, 
Rais'd by Echion in a lonely wood, 
And full of brown, religious horror stood. 
By a long painful journey faint, they chose! 
Their weary limbs here secret to repose. 
But soon my pow'r inflam'd the lustful boy, 
Careless of rest he sought untimely joy. 
A hallow'd gloomy cave, with moss o'er-grown, 
The temple join'd, of native pumice-stone, 
Where antique images by priests were kept. 
And wooden deities securely slept. 
Thither the rash Hippomenes retires, 
And gives a loose to all his wild desires, 
And the chaste cell pollutes with wanton fires. 
The sacred statues trembled with surprize, 
The tow'ry Goddess, blushing, veil'd her eyes; 
And the lewd pair to Stygian sounds had sent, 
But unrevengeful seem'd that punishment, 
A heavier doom such black prophaneness draws, 
Their taper figures turn to crooked paws. 
No more their necks the smoothness can retain, 
Now cover'd sudden with a yellow mane. 
Arms change to legs: each finds the hard'ning breast 
Of rage unknown, and wond'rous strength possest. 
Their alter'd looks with fury grim appear, 
And on the ground their brushing tails they hear. 
They haunt the woods: their voices, which before 
Were musically sweet, now hoarsly roar. 
Hence lions, dreadful to the lab'ring swains, 
Are tam'd by Cybele, and curb'd with reins, 
And humbly draw her car along the plains. 
But thou, Adonis, my delightful care, 
Of these, and beasts, as fierce as these, beware! 
The savage, which not shuns thee, timely shun, 
For by rash prowess should'st thou be undone, 
A double ruin is contain'd in one. 
Thus cautious Venus school'd her fav'rite boy; 
But youthful heat all cautions will destroy. 
His sprightly soul beyond grave counsels flies, 
While with yok'd swans the Goddess cuts the skies. 
His faithful hounds, led by the tainted wind, 
Lodg'd in thick coverts chanc'd a boar to find. 
The callow hero show'd a manly heart, 
And pierc'd the savage with a side-long dart. 
The flying savage, wounded, turn'd again, 
Wrench'd out the gory dart, and foam'd with pain. 
The trembling boy by flight his safety sought, 
And now recall'd the lore, which Venus taught; 
But now too late to fly the boar he strove, 
Who in the groin his tusks impetuous drove, 
On the discolour'd grass Adonis lay, 
The monster trampling o'er his beauteous prey. 

Fair Cytherea, Cyprus scarce in view, 
Heard from afar his groans, and own'd them true, 
And turn'd her snowy swans, and backward flew. 
But as she saw him gasp his latest breath, 
And quiv'ring agonize in pangs of death, 
Down with swift flight she plung'd, nor rage forbore, 
At once her garments, and her hair she tore. 
With cruel blows she beat her guiltless breast, 
The Fates upbraided, and her love confest. 
Nor shall they yet (she cry'd) the whole devour 
With uncontroul'd, inexorable pow'r: 
For thee, lost youth, my tears, and restless pain 
Shall in immortal monuments remain, 
With solemn pomp in annual rites return'd, 
Be thou for ever, my Adonis, mourn'd, 
Could Pluto's queen with jealous fury storm, 
And Menthe to a fragrant herb transform? 
Yet dares not Venus with a change surprise, 
And in a flow'r bid her fall'n heroe rise? 
Then on the blood sweet nectar she bestows, 
The scented blood in little bubbles rose: 
Little as rainy drops, which flutt'ring fly, 
Born by the winds, along a low'ring sky. 
Short time ensu'd, 'till where the blood was shed, 
A flow'r began to rear its purple head: 
Such, as on Punick apples is reveal'd, 
Or in the filmy rind but half conceal'd. 
Still here the Fate of lovely forms we see, 
So sudden fades the sweet Anemonie. 
The feeble stems, to stormy blasts a prey, 
Their sickly beauties droop, and pine away. 
The winds forbid the flow'rs to flourish long, 
Which owe to winds their names in Grecian song. 

Here, while the Thracian bard's enchanting strain 
Sooths beasts, and woods, and all the listn'ing plain, 
The female Bacchanals, devoutly mad, 
In shaggy skins, like savage creatures, clad, 
Warbling in air perceiv'd his lovely lay, 
And from a rising ground beheld him play. 
When one, the wildest, with dishevel'd hair, 
That loosely stream'd, and ruffled in the air; 
Soon as her frantick eye the lyrist spy'd, 
See, see! the hater of our sex, she cry'd. 
Then at his face her missive javelin sent, 
Which whiz'd along, and brusht him as it went; 
But the soft wreathes of ivy twisted round, 
Prevent a deep impression of the wound. 
Another, for a weapon, hurls a stone, 
Which, by the sound subdu'd as soon as thrown, 
Falls at his feet, and with a seeming sense 
Implores his pardon for its late offence. 
But now their frantick rage unbounded grows, 
Turns all to madness, and no measure knows: 
Yet this the charms of musick might subdue, 
But that, with all its charms, is conquer'd too; 
In louder strains their hideous yellings rise, 
And squeaking horn-pipes eccho thro' the skies, 
Which, in hoarse consort with the drum, confound 
The moving lyre, and ev'ry gentle sound: 
Then 'twas the deafen'd stones flew on with speed, 
And saw, unsooth'd, their tuneful poet bleed. 
The birds, the beasts, and all the savage crew 
Which the sweet lyrist to attention drew, 
Now, by the female mob's more furious rage, 
Are driv'n, and forc'd to quit the shady stage. 
Next their fierce hands the bard himself assail, 
Nor can his song against their wrath prevail: 
They flock, like birds, when in a clustring flight, 
By day they chase the boding fowl of night. 
So crowded amphitheatres survey 
The stag, to greedy dogs a future prey. 
Their steely javelins, which soft curls entwine 
Of budding tendrils from the leafy vine, 
For sacred rites of mild religion made, 
Are flung promiscuous at the poet's head. 
Those clods of earth or flints discharge, and these 
Hurl prickly branches sliver'd from the trees. 
And, lest their passion shou'd be unsupply'd, 
The rabble crew, by chance, at distance spy'd 
Where oxen, straining at the heavy yoke, 
The fallow'd field with slow advances broke; 
Nigh which the brawny peasants dug the soil, 
Procuring food with long laborious toil. 
These, when they saw the ranting throng draw near, 
Quitted their tools, and fled, possest with fear. 
Long spades, and rakes of mighty size were found, 
Carelesly left upon the broken ground. 
With these the furious lunaticks engage, 
And first the lab'ring oxen feel their rage; 
Then to the poet they return with speed, 
Whose fate was, past prevention, now decreed: 
In vain he lifts his suppliant hands, in vain 
He tries, before, his never-failing strain. 
And, from those sacred lips, whose thrilling sound 
Fierce tygers, and insensate rocks cou'd wound, 
Ah Gods! how moving was the mournful sight! 
To see the fleeting soul now take its flight. 
Thee the soft warblers of the feather'd kind 
Bewail'd; for thee thy savage audience pin'd; 
Those rocks and woods that oft thy strain had led, 
Mourn for their charmer, and lament him dead; 
And drooping trees their leafy glories shed. 
Naids and Dryads with dishevel'd hair 
Promiscuous weep, and scarfs of sable wear; 
Nor cou'd the river-Gods conceal their moan, 
But with new floods of tears augment their own. 
His mangled limbs lay scatter'd all around, 
His head, and harp a better fortune found; 
In Hebrus' streams they gently roul'd along, 
And sooth'd the waters with a mournful song. 
Soft deadly notes the lifeless tongue inspire, 
A doleful tune sounds from the floating lyre; 
The hollows banks in solemn consort mourn, 
And the sad strain in ecchoing groans return. 
Now with the current to the sea they glide, 
Born by the billows of the briny tide; 
And driv'n where waves round rocky Lesbos roar, 
They strand, and lodge upon Methymna's shore. 

But here, when landed on the foreign soil, 
A venom'd snake, the product of the isle 
Attempts the head, and sacred locks embru'd 
With clotted gore, and still fresh-dropping blood. 
Phoebus, at last, his kind protection gives, 
And from the fact the greedy monster drives: 
Whose marbled jaws his impious crime atone, 
Still grinning ghastly, tho' transform'd to stone. 

His ghost flies downward to the Stygian shore, 
And knows the places it had seen before: 
Among the shadows of the pious train 
He finds Eurydice, and loves again; 
With pleasure views the beauteous phantom's charms, 
And clasps her in his unsubstantial arms. 
There side by side they unmolested walk, 
Or pass their blissful hours in pleasing talk; 
Aft or before the bard securely goes, 
And, without danger, can review his spouse. 

Bacchus, resolving to revenge the wrong, 
Of Orpheus murder'd, on the madding throng, 
Decreed that each accomplice dame should stand 
Fix'd by the roots along the conscious land. 
Their wicked feet, that late so nimbly ran 
To wreak their malice on the guiltless man, 
Sudden with twisted ligatures were bound, 
Like trees, deep planted in the turfy ground. 
And, as the fowler with his subtle gins, 
His feather'd captives by the feet entwines, 
That flutt'ring pant, and struggle to get loose, 
Yet only closer draw the fatal noose; 
So these were caught; and, as they strove in vain 
To quit the place, they but encreas'd their pain. 
They flounce and toil, yet find themselves controul'd; 
The root, tho' pliant, toughly keeps its hold. 
In vain their toes and feet they look to find, 
For ev'n their shapely legs are cloath'd with rind. 
One smites her thighs with a lamenting stroke, 
And finds the flesh transform'd to solid oak; 
Another, with surprize, and grief distrest, 
Lays on above, but beats a wooden breast. 
A rugged bark their softer neck invades, 
Their branching arms shoot up delightful shades; 
At once they seem, and are, a real grove, 
With mossy trunks below, and verdant leaves above. 

Nor this suffic'd; the God's disgust remains, 
And he resolves to quit their hated plains; 
The vineyards of Tymole ingross his care, 
And, with a better choir, he fixes there; 
Where the smooth streams of clear Pactolus roll'd, 
Then undistinguish'd for its sands of gold. 
The satyrs with the nymphs, his usual throng, 
Come to salute their God, and jovial danc'd along. 
Silenus only miss'd; for while he reel'd, 
Feeble with age, and wine, about the field, 
The hoary drunkard had forgot his way, 
And to the Phrygian clowns became a prey; 
Who to king Midas drag the captive God, 
While on his totty pate the wreaths of ivy nod. 

Midas from Orpheus had been taught his lore, 
And knew the rites of Bacchus long before. 
He, when he saw his venerable guest, 
In honour of the God ordain'd a feast. 
Ten days in course, with each continu'd night, 
Were spent in genial mirth, and brisk delight: 
Then on th' eleventh, when with brighter ray 
Phosphor had chac'd the fading stars away, 
The king thro' Lydia's fields young Bacchus sought, 
And to the God his foster-father brought. 
Pleas'd with the welcome sight, he bids him soon 
But name his wish, and swears to grant the boon. 
A glorious offer! yet but ill bestow'd 
On him whose choice so little judgment show'd. 
Give me, says he (nor thought he ask'd too much), 
That with my body whatsoe'er I touch, 
Chang'd from the nature which it held of old, 
May be converted into yellow gold. 
He had his wish; but yet the God repin'd, 
To think the fool no better wish could find. 

But the brave king departed from the place, 
With smiles of gladness sparkling in his face: 
Nor could contain, but, as he took his way, 
Impatient longs to make the first essay. 
Down from a lowly branch a twig he drew, 
The twig strait glitter'd with a golden hue: 
He takes a stone, the stone was turn'd to gold; 
A clod he touches, and the crumbling mold 
Acknowledg'd soon the great transforming pow'r, 
In weight and substance like a mass of ore. 
He pluck'd the corn, and strait his grasp appears 
Fill'd with a bending tuft of golden ears. 
An apple next he takes, and seems to hold 
The bright Hesperian vegetable gold. 
His hand he careless on a pillar lays. 
With shining gold the fluted pillars blaze: 
And while he washes, as the servants pour, 
His touch converts the stream to Danae's show'r. 

To see these miracles so finely wrought, 
Fires with transporting joy his giddy thought. 
The ready slaves prepare a sumptuous board, 
Spread with rich dainties for their happy lord; 
Whose pow'rful hands the bread no sooner hold, 
But its whole substance is transform'd to gold: 
Up to his mouth he lifts the sav'ry meat, 
Which turns to gold as he attempts to eat: 
His patron's noble juice of purple hue, 
Touch'd by his lips, a gilded cordial grew; 
Unfit for drink, and wondrous to behold, 
It trickles from his jaws a fluid gold. 

The rich poor fool, confounded with surprize, 
Starving in all his various plenty lies: 
Sick of his wish, he now detests the pow'r, 
For which he ask'd so earnestly before; 
Amidst his gold with pinching famine curst; 
And justly tortur'd with an equal thirst. 
At last his shining arms to Heav'n he rears, 
And in distress, for refuge, flies to pray'rs. 
O father Bacchus, I have sinn'd, he cry'd, 
And foolishly thy gracious gift apply'd; 
Thy pity now, repenting, I implore; 
Oh! may I feel the golden plague no more. 

The hungry wretch, his folly thus confest, 
Touch'd the kind deity's good-natur'd breast; 
The gentle God annull'd his first decree, 
And from the cruel compact set him free. 
But then, to cleanse him quite from further harm, 
And to dilute the relicks of the charm, 
He bids him seek the stream that cuts the land 
Nigh where the tow'rs of Lydian Sardis stand; 
Then trace the river to the fountain head, 
And meet it rising from its rocky bed; 
There, as the bubling tide pours forth amain, 
To plunge his body in, and wash away the stain. 
The king instructed to the fount retires, 
But with the golden charm the stream inspires: 
For while this quality the man forsakes, 
An equal pow'r the limpid water takes; 
Informs with veins of gold the neighb'ring land, 
And glides along a bed of golden sand. 

Now loathing wealth, th' occasion of his woes, 
Far in the woods he sought a calm repose; 
In caves and grottos, where the nymphs resort, 
And keep with mountain Pan their sylvan court. 
Ah! had he left his stupid soul behind! 
But his condition alter'd not his mind. 

For where high Tmolus rears his shady brow, 
And from his cliffs surveys the seas below, 
In his descent, by Sardis bounded here, 
By the small confines of Hypaepa there, 
Pan to the nymphs his frolick ditties play'd, 
Tuning his reeds beneath the chequer'd shade. 
The nymphs are pleas'd, the boasting sylvan plays, 
And speaks with slight of great Apollo's lays. 
Tmolus was arbiter; the boaster still 
Accepts the tryal with unequal skill. 
The venerable judge was seated high 
On his own hill, that seem'd to touch the sky. 
Above the whisp'ring trees his head he rears, 
From their encumbring boughs to free his ears; 
A wreath of oak alone his temples bound, 
The pendant acorns loosely dangled round. 
In me your judge, says he, there's no delay: 
Then bids the goatherd God begin, and play. 
Pan tun'd the pipe, and with his rural song 
Pleas'd the low taste of all the vulgar throng; 
Such songs a vulgar judgment mostly please, 
Midas was there, and Midas judg'd with these. 

The mountain sire with grave deportment now 
To Phoebus turns his venerable brow: 
And, as he turns, with him the listning wood 
In the same posture of attention stood. 
The God his own Parnassian laurel crown'd, 
And in a wreath his golden tresses bound, 
Graceful his purple mantle swept the ground. 
High on the left his iv'ry lute he rais'd, 
The lute, emboss'd with glitt'ring jewels, blaz'd 
In his right hand he nicely held the quill, 
His easy posture spoke a master's skill. 
The strings he touch'd with more than human art, 
Which pleas'd the judge's ear, and sooth'd his heart; 
Who soon judiciously the palm decreed, 
And to the lute postpon'd the squeaking reed. 

All, with applause, the rightful sentence heard, 
Midas alone dissatisfy'd appear'd; 
To him unjustly giv'n the judgment seems, 
For Pan's barbarick notes he most esteems. 
The lyrick God, who thought his untun'd ear 
Deserv'd but ill a human form to wear, 
Of that deprives him, and supplies the place 
With some more fit, and of an ampler space: 
Fix'd on his noddle an unseemly pair, 
Flagging, and large, and full of whitish hair; 
Without a total change from what he was, 
Still in the man preserves the simple ass. 

He, to conceal the scandal of the deed, 
A purple turbant folds about his head; 
Veils the reproach from publick view, and fears 
The laughing world would spy his monstrous ears. 
One trusty barber-slave, that us'd to dress 
His master's hair, when lengthen'd to excess, 
The mighty secret knew, but knew alone, 
And, tho' impatient, durst not make it known. 
Restless, at last, a private place he found, 
Then dug a hole, and told it to the ground; 
In a low whisper he reveal'd the case, 
And cover'd in the earth, and silent left the place. 

In time, of trembling reeds a plenteous crop 
From the confided furrow sprouted up; 
Which, high advancing with the ripening year, 
Made known the tiller, and his fruitless care: 
For then the rustling blades, and whisp'ring wind, 
To tell th' important secret, both combin'd. 

Phoebus, with full revenge, from Tmolus flies, 
Darts thro' the air, and cleaves the liquid skies; 
Near Hellespont he lights, and treads the plains 
Where great Laomedon sole monarch reigns; 
Where, built between the two projecting strands, 
To Panomphaean Jove an altar stands. 
Here first aspiring thoughts the king employ, 
To found the lofty tow'rs of future Troy. 
The work, from schemes magnificent begun, 
At vast expence was slowly carry'd on: 
Which Phoebus seeing, with the trident God 
Who rules the swelling surges with his nod, 
Assuming each a mortal shape, combine 
At a set price to finish his design. 
The work was built; the king their price denies, 
And his injustice backs with perjuries. 
This Neptune cou'd not brook, but drove the main, 
A mighty deluge, o'er the Phrygian plain: 
'Twas all a sea; the waters of the deep 
From ev'ry vale the copious harvest sweep; 
The briny billows overflow the soil, 
Ravage the fields, and mock the plowman's toil. 

Nor this appeas'd the God's revengeful mind, 
For still a greater plague remains behind; 
A huge sea-monster lodges on the sands, 
And the king's daughter for his prey demands. 
To him that sav'd the damsel, was decreed 
A set of horses of the Sun's fine breed: 
But when Alcides from the rock unty'd 
The trembling fair, the ransom was deny'd. 
He, in revenge, the new-built walls attack'd, 
And the twice-perjur'd city bravely sack'd. 
Telamon aided, and in justice shar'd 
Part of the plunder as his due reward: 
The princess, rescu'd late, with all her charms, 
Hesione, was yielded to his arms; 
For Peleus, with a Goddess-bride, was more 
Proud of his spouse, than of his birth before: 
Grandsons to Jove there might be more than one, 
But he the Goddess had enjoy'd alone. 

For Proteus thus to virgin Thetis said, 
Fair Goddess of the waves, consent to wed, 
And take some spritely lover to your bed. 
A son you'll have, the terror of the field, 
To whom in fame, and pow'r his sire shall yield. 

Jove, who ador'd the nymph with boundless love, 
Did from his breast the dangerous flame remove. 
He knew the Fates, nor car'd to raise up one, 
Whose fame and greatness should eclipse his own, 
On happy Peleus he bestow'd her charms, 
And bless'd his grandson in the Goddess' arms: 

A silent creek Thessalia's coast can show; 
Two arms project, and shape it like a bow; 
'Twould make a bay, but the transparent tide 
Does scarce the yellow-gravell'd bottom hide; 
For the quick eye may thro' the liquid wave 
A firm unweedy level beach perceive. 
A grove of fragrant myrtle near it grows, 
Whose boughs, tho' thick, a beauteous grot disclose; 
The well-wrought fabrick, to discerning eyes, 
Rather by art than Nature seems to rise. 
A bridled dolphin oft fair Thetis bore 
To this her lov'd retreat, her fav'rite shore. 
Here Peleus seiz'd her, slumbring while she lay, 
And urg'd his suit with all that love could say: 
But when he found her obstinately coy, 
Resolv'd to force her, and command the joy; 
The nymph, o'erpowr'd, to art for succour flies 
And various shapes the eager youth surprize: 
A bird she seems, but plies her wings in vain, 
His hands the fleeting substance still detain: 
A branchy tree high in the air she grew; 
About its bark his nimble arms he threw: 
A tyger next she glares with flaming eyes; 
The frighten'd lover quits his hold, and flies: 
The sea-Gods he with sacred rites adores, 
Then a libation on the ocean pours; 
While the fat entrails crackle in the fire, 
And sheets of smoak in sweet perfume aspire; 
'Till Proteus rising from his oozy bed, 
Thus to the poor desponding lover said: 
No more in anxious thoughts your mind employ, 
For yet you shall possess the dear expected joy. 
You must once more th' unwary nymph surprize, 
As in her cooly grot she slumbring lies; 
Then bind her fast with unrelenting hands, 
And strain her tender limbs with knotted bands. 
Still hold her under ev'ry different shape, 
'Till tir'd she tries no longer to escape. 
Thus he: then sunk beneath the glassy flood, 
And broken accents flutter'd, where he stood. 

Bright Sol had almost now his journey done, 
And down the steepy western convex run; 
When the fair Nereid left the briny wave, 
And, as she us'd, retreated to her cave. 
He scarce had bound her fast, when she arose, 
And into various shapes her body throws: 
She went to move her arms, and found 'em ty'd; 
Then with a sigh, Some God assists ye, cry'd, 
And in her proper shape stood blushing by his side. 
About her waiste his longing arms he flung, 
From which embrace the great Achilles sprung. 

Peleus unmix'd felicity enjoy'd 
(Blest in a valiant son, and virtuous bride), 
'Till Fortune did in blood his hands imbrue, 
And his own brother by curst chance he slew: 
Then driv'n from Thessaly, his native clime, 
Trachinia first gave shelter to his crime; 
Where peaceful Ceyx mildly fill'd the throne, 
And like his sire, the morning planet, shone; 
But now, unlike himself, bedew'd with tears, 
Mourning a brother lost, his brow appears. 
First to the town with travel spent, and care, 
Peleus, and his small company repair: 
His herds, and flocks the while at leisure feed, 
On the rich pasture of a neighb'ring mead. 
The prince before the royal presence brought, 
Shew'd by the suppliant olive what he sought; 
Then tells his name, and race, and country right, 
But hides th' unhappy reason of his flight. 
He begs the king some little town to give, 
Where they may safe his faithful vassals live. 
Ceyx reply'd: To all my bounty flows, 
A hospitable realm your suit has chose. 
Your glorious race, and far-resounding fame, 
And grandsire Jove, peculiar favours claim. 
All you can wish, I grant; entreaties spare; 
My kingdom (would 'twere worth the sharing) share. 

Tears stop'd his speech: astonish'd Peleus pleads 
To know the cause from whence his grief proceeds. 
The prince reply'd: There's none of ye but deems 
This hawk was ever such as now it seems; 
Know 'twas a heroe once, Daedalion nam'd, 
For warlike deeds, and haughty valour fam'd; 
Like me to that bright luminary born, 
Who wakes Aurora, and brings on the morn. 
His fierceness still remains, and love of blood, 
Now dread of birds, and tyrant of the wood. 
My make was softer, peace my greatest care; 
But this my brother wholly bent on war; 
Late nations fear'd, and routed armies fled 
That force, which now the tim'rous pigeons dread. 
A daughter he possess'd, divinely fair, 
And scarcely yet had seen her fifteenth year; 
Young Chione: a thousand rivals strove 
To win the maid, and teach her how to love. 
Phoebus, and Mercury by chance one day 
From Delphi, and Cyllene past this way; 
Together they the virgin saw: desire 
At once warm'd both their breasts with am'rous fire. 
Phoebus resolv'd to wait 'till close of day; 
But Mercury's hot love brook'd no delay; 
With his entrancing rod the maid he charms, 
And unresisted revels in her arms. 
'Twas night, and Phoebus in a beldam's dress, 
To the late rifled beauty got access. 
Her time compleat nine circling moons had run; 
To either God she bore a lovely son: 
To Mercury Autolycus she brought, 
Who turn'd to thefts and tricks his subtle thought; 
Possess'd he was of all his father's slight, 
At will made white look black, and black look white. 
Philammon born to Phoebus, like his sire, 
The Muses lov'd, and finely struck the lyre, 
And made his voice, and touch in harmony conspire. 
In vain, fond maid, you boast this double birth, 
The love of Gods, and royal father's worth, 
And Jove among your ancestors rehearse! 
Could blessings such as these e'er prove a curse? 
To her they did, who with audacious pride, 
Vain of her own, Diana's charms decry'd. 
Her taunts the Goddess with resentment fill; 
My face you like not, you shall try my skill. 
She said; and strait her vengeful bow she strung, 
And sent a shaft that pierc'd her guilty tongue: 
The bleeding tongue in vain its accents tries; 
In the red stream her soul reluctant flies. 
With sorrow wild I ran to her relief, 
And try'd to moderate my brother's grief. 
He, deaf as rocks by stormy surges beat, 
Loudly laments, and hears me not intreat. 
When on the fun'ral pile he saw her laid, 
Thrice he to rush into the flames assay'd, 
Thrice with officious care by us was stay'd. 
Now, mad with grief, away he fled amain, 
Like a stung heifer that resents the pain, 
And bellowing wildly bounds along the plain. 
O'er the most rugged ways so fast he ran, 
He seem'd a bird already, not a man: 
He left us breathless all behind; and now 
In quest of death had gain'd Parnassus' brow: 
But when from thence headlong himself he threw, 
He fell not, but with airy pinions flew. 
Phoebus in pity chang'd him to a fowl, 
Whose crooked beak and claws the birds controul, 
Little of bulk, but of a warlike soul. 
A hawk become, the feather'd race's foe, 
He tries to case his own by other's woe. 

While they astonish'd heard the king relate 
These wonders of his hapless brother's fate; 
The prince's herdsman at the court arrives, 
And fresh surprize to all the audience gives. 
O Peleus, Peleus! dreadful news I bear, 
He said; and trembled as he spoke for fear. 
The worst, affrighted Peleus bid him tell, 
Whilst Ceyx too grew pale with friendly zeal. 
Thus he began: When Sol mid-heav'n had gain'd, 
And half his way was past, and half remain'd, 
I to the level shore my cattle drove, 
And let them freely in the meadows rove. 
Some stretch'd at length admire the watry plain, 
Some crop'd the herb, some wanton swam the main. 
A temple stands of antique make hard by, 
Where no gilt domes, nor marble lure the eye; 
Unpolish'd rafters bear its lowly height, 
Hid by a grove, as ancient, from the sight. 
Here Nereus, and the Nereids they adore; 
I learnt it from the man who thither bore 
His net, to dry it on the sunny shore. 
Adjoyns a lake, inclos'd with willows round, 
Where swelling waves have overflow'd the mound, 
And, muddy, stagnate on the lower ground. 
From thence a russling noise increasing flies, 
Strikes the still shore; and frights us with surprize, 
Strait a huge wolf rush'd from the marshy wood, 
His jaws besmear'd with mingled foam, and blood, 
Tho' equally by hunger urg'd, and rage, 
His appetite he minds not to asswage; 
Nought that he meets, his rabid fury spares, 
But the whole herd with mad disorder tears. 
Some of our men who strove to drive him thence, 
Torn by his teeth, have dy'd in their defence. 
The echoing lakes, the sea, and fields, and shore, 
Impurpled blush with streams of reeking gore. 
Delay is loss, nor have we time for thought; 
While yet some few remain alive, we ought 
To seize our arms, and with confederate force 
Try if we so can stop his bloody course. 
But Peleus car'd not for his ruin'd herd; 
His crime he call'd to mind, and thence inferr'd, 
That Psamathe's revenge this havock made, 
In sacrifice to murder'd Phocus' shade. 
The king commands his servants to their arms; 
Resolv'd to go; but the loud noise alarms 
His lovely queen, who from her chamber flew, 
And her half-plaited hair behind her threw: 
About his neck she hung with loving fears, 
And now with words, and now with pleading tears, 
Intreated that he'd send his men alone, 
And stay himself, to save two lives in one. 
Then Peleus: Your just fears, o queen, forget; 
Too much the offer leaves me in your debt. 
No arms against the monster I shall bear, 
But the sea nymphs appease with humble pray'r. 

The citadel's high turrets pierce the sky, 
Which home-bound vessels, glad, from far descry; 
This they ascend, and thence with sorrow ken 
The mangled heifers lye, and bleeding men; 
Th' inexorable ravager they view, 
With blood discolour'd, still the rest pursue: 
There Peleus pray'd submissive tow'rds the sea, 
And deprecates the ire of injur'd Psamathe. 
But deaf to all his pray'rs the nymph remain'd, 
'Till Thetis for her spouse the boon obtain'd. 
Pleas'd with the luxury, the furious beast, 
Unstop'd, continues still his bloody feast: 
While yet upon a sturdy bull he flew, 
Chang'd by the nymph, a marble block he grew. 
No longer dreadful now the wolf appears, 
Bury'd in stone, and vanish'd like their fears. 
Yet still the Fates unhappy Peleus vex'd; 
To the Magnesian shore he wanders next. 
Acastus there, who rul'd the peaceful clime, 
Grants his request, and expiates his crime. 

These prodigies affect the pious prince, 
But more perplex'd with those that happen'd since, 
He purposes to seek the Clarian God, 
Avoiding Delphi, his more fam'd abode, 
Since Phlegyan robbers made unsafe the road. 
Yet could he not from her he lov'd so well, 
The fatal voyage, he resolv'd, conceal; 
But when she saw her lord prepar'd to part, 
A deadly cold ran shiv'ring to her heart; 
Her faded cheeks are chang'd to boxen hue, 
And in her eyes the tears are ever new. 
She thrice essay'd to speak; her accents hung, 
And falt'ring dy'd unfinish'd on her tongue, 
And vanish'd into sighs: with long delay 
Her voice return'd, and found the wonted way. 

Tell me, my lord, she said, what fault unknown 
Thy once belov'd Alcyone has done? 
Whither, ah, whither, is thy kindness gone! 
Can Ceyx then sustain to leave his wife, 
And unconcern'd forsake the sweets of life? 
What can thy mind to this long journey move? 
Or need'st thou absence to renew thy love? 
Yet, if thou go'st by land, tho' grief possess 
My soul ev'n then, my fears will be the less. 
But ah! be warn'd to shun the watry way, 
The face is frightful of the stormy sea: 
For late I saw a-drift disjointed planks, 
And empty tombs erected on the banks. 
Nor let false hopes to trust betray thy mind, 
Because my sire in caves constrains the wind, 
Can with a breath their clam'rous rage appease, 
They fear his whistle, and forsake the seas: 
Not so; for once indulg'd, they sweep the main; 
Deaf to the call, or hearing, hear in vain; 
But bent on mischief bear the waves before, 
And not content with seas, insult the shore, 
When ocean, air, and Earth, at once ingage, 
And rooted forests fly before their rage: 
At once the clashing clouds to battel move, 
And lightnings run across the fields above: 
I know them well, and mark'd their rude comport, 
While yet a child within my father's court: 
In times of tempest they command alone, 
And he but sits precarious on the throne: 
The more I know, the more my fears augment; 
And fears are oft prophetick of th' event. 
But if not fears, or reasons will prevail, 
If Fate has fix'd thee obstinate to sail, 
Go not without thy wife, but let me bear 
My part of danger with an equal share, 
And present, what I suffer only fear: 
Then o'er the bounding billows shall we fly, 
Secure to live together, or to die. 

These reasons mov'd her warlike husband's heart, 
But still he held his purpose to depart: 
For as he lov'd her equal to his life, 
He would not to the seas expose his wife; 
Nor could be wrought his voyage to refrain, 
But sought by arguments to sooth her pain: 
Nor these avail'd; at length he lights on one, 
With which so difficult a cause he won: 
My love, so short an absence cease to fear, 
For by my father's holy flame I swear, 
Before two moons their orb with light adorn, 
If Heav'n allow me life, I will return. 

This promise of so short a stay prevails; 
He soon equips the ship, supplies the sails, 
And gives the word to launch; she trembling views 
This pomp of death, and parting tears renews: 
Last with a kiss, she took a long farewel, 
Sigh'd with a sad presage, and swooning fell: 
While Ceyx seeks delays, the lusty crew, 
Rais'd on their banks, their oars in order drew 
To their broad breasts, the ship with fury flew. 

The queen recover'd, rears her humid eyes, 
And first her husband on the poop espies, 
Shaking his hand at distance on the main; 
She took the sign, and shook her hand again. 
Still as the ground recedes, contracts her view 
With sharpen'd sight, 'till she no longer knew 
The much-lov'd face; that comfort lost supplies 
With less, and with the galley feeds her eyes; 
The galley born from view by rising gales, 
She follow'd with her sight the flying sails: 
When ev'n the flying sails were seen no more, 
Forsaken of all sight she left the shore. 

Then on her bridal bed her body throws, 
And sought in sleep her wearied eyes to close: 
Her husband's pillow, and the widow'd part 
Which once he press'd, renew'd the former smart. 

And now a breeze from shoar began to blow, 
The sailors ship their oars, and cease to row; 
Then hoist their yards a-trip, and all their sails 
Let fall, to court the wind, and catch the gales: 
By this the vessel half her course had run, 
Both shoars were lost to sight, when at the close 
Of day a stiffer gale at east arose: 
The sea grew white, the rouling waves from far, 
Like heralds, first denounce the watry war. 

This seen, the master soon began to cry, 
Strike, strike the top-sail; let the main-sheet fly, 
And furl your sails: the winds repel the sound, 
And in the speaker's mouth the speech is drown'd. 
Yet of their own accord, as danger taught 
Each in his way, officiously they wrought; 
Some stow their oars, or stop the leaky sides, 
Another bolder, yet the yard bestrides, 
And folds the sails; a fourth with labour laves 
Th' intruding seas, and waves ejects on waves. 

In this confusion while their work they ply, 
The winds augment the winter of the sky, 
And wage intestine wars; the suff'ring seas 
Are toss'd, and mingled, as their tyrants please. 
The master would command, but in despair 
Of safety, stands amaz'd with stupid care, 
Nor what to bid, or what forbid he knows, 
Th' ungovern'd tempest to such fury grows: 
Vain is his force, and vainer is his skill; 
With such a concourse comes the flood of ill; 
The cries of men are mix'd with rattling shrowds; 
Seas dash on seas, and clouds encounter clouds: 
At once from east to west, from pole to pole, 
The forky lightnings flash, the roaring thunders roul. 

Now waves on waves ascending scale the skies, 
And in the fires above the water fries: 
When yellow sands are sifted from below, 
The glittering billows give a golden show: 
And when the fouler bottom spews the black 
The Stygian dye the tainted waters take: 
Then frothy white appear the flatted seas, 
And change their colour, changing their disease, 
Like various fits the Trachin vessel finds, 
And now sublime, she rides upon the winds; 
As from a lofty summit looks from high, 
And from the clouds beholds the nether sky; 
Now from the depth of Hell they lift their sight, 
And at a distance see superior light; 
The lashing billows make a loud report, 
And beat her sides, as batt'ring rams a fort: 
Or as a lion bounding in his way, 
With force augmented, bears against his prey, 
Sidelong to seize; or unapal'd with fear, 
Springs on the toils, and rushes on the spear: 
So seas impell'd by winds, with added pow'r 
Assault the sides, and o'er the hatches tow'r. 

The planks (their pitchy cov'ring wash'd away) 
Now yield; and now a yawning breach display: 
The roaring waters with a hostile tide 
Rush through the ruins of her gaping side. 
Mean-time in sheets of rain the sky descends, 
And ocean swell'd with waters upwards tends; 
One rising, falling one, the Heav'ns and sea 
Meet at their confines, in the middle way: 
The sails are drunk with show'rs, and drop with rain, 
Sweet waters mingle with the briny main. 
No star appears to lend his friendly light; 
Darkness, and tempest make a double night; 
But flashing fires disclose the deep by turns, 
And while the lightnings blaze, the water burns. 

Now all the waves their scatter'd force unite, 
And as a soldier foremost in the fight, 
Makes way for others, and an host alone 
Still presses on, and urging gains the town; 
So while th' invading billows come a-breast, 
The hero tenth advanc'd before the rest, 
Sweeps all before him with impetuous sway, 
And from the walls descends upon the prey; 
Part following enter, part remain without, 
With envy hear their fellows' conqu'ring shout, 
And mount on others' backs, in hopes to share 
The city, thus become the seat of war. 

An universal cry resounds aloud, 
The sailors run in heaps, a helpless crowd; 
Art fails, and courage falls, no succour near; 
As many waves, as many deaths appear. 
One weeps, and yet despairs of late relief; 
One cannot weep, his fears congeal his grief, 
But stupid, with dry eyes expects his fate: 
One with loud shrieks laments his lost estate, 
And calls those happy whom their fun'rals wait. 
This wretch with pray'rs and vows the Gods implores, 
And ev'n the skies he cannot see, adores. 
That other on his friends his thoughts bestows, 
His careful father, and his faithful spouse. 
The covetous worldling in his anxious mind, 
Thinks only on the wealth he left behind. 

All Ceyx his Alcyone employs, 
For her he grieves, yet in her absence joys: 
His wife he wishes, and would still be near, 
Not her with him, but wishes him with her: 
Now with last looks he seeks his native shoar, 
Which Fate has destin'd him to see no more; 
He sought, but in the dark tempestuous night 
He knew not whither to direct his sight. 
So whirl the seas, such darkness blinds the sky, 
That the black night receives a deeper dye. 

The giddy ship ran round; the tempest tore 
Her mast, and over-board the rudder bore. 
One billow mounts, and with a scornful brow, 
Proud of her conquest gain'd, insults the waves below; 
Nor lighter falls, than if some giant tore 
Pindus and Athos with the freight they bore, 
And toss'd on seas; press'd with the pond'rous blow, 
Down sinks the ship within th' abyss below: 
Down with the vessel sink into the main 
The many, never more to rise again. 
Some few on scatter'd planks, with fruitless care, 
Lay hold, and swim; but while they swim, despair. 

Ev'n he who late a scepter did command, 
Now grasps a floating fragment in his hand; 
And while he struggles on the stormy main, 
Invokes his father, and his wife's, in vain. 
But yet his consort is his greatest care, 
Alcyone he names amidst his pray'r; 
Names as a charm against the waves and wind; 
Most in his mouth, and ever in his mind. 
Tir'd with his toil, all hopes of safety past, 
From pray'rs to wishes he descends at last; 
That his dead body, wafted to the sands, 
Might have its burial from her friendly hands, 
As oft as he can catch a gulp of air, 
And peep above the seas, he names the fair; 
And ev'n when plung'd beneath, on her he raves, 
Murm'ring Alcyone below the waves: 
At last a falling billow stops his breath, 
Breaks o'er his head, and whelms him underneath. 
That night, his heav'nly form obscur'd with tears, 
And since he was forbid to leave the skies, 
He muffled with a cloud his mournful eyes. 

Mean-time Alcyone (his fate unknown) 
Computes how many nights he had been gone. 
Observes the waining moon with hourly view, 
Numbers her age, and wishes for a new; 
Against the promis'd time provides with care, 
And hastens in the woof the robes he was to wear: 
And for her self employs another loom, 
New-dress'd to meet her lord returning home, 
Flatt'ring her heart with joys, that never were to come:

She fum'd the temples with an od'rous flame, 
And oft before the sacred altars came, 
To pray for him, who was an empty name. 
All Pow'rs implor'd, but far above the rest 
To Juno she her pious vows address'd, 
Her much-lov'd lord from perils to protect, 
And safe o'er seas his voyage to direct: 
Then pray'd, that she might still possess his heart, 
And no pretending rival share a part; 
This last petition heard of all her pray'r, 
The rest, dispers'd by winds, were lost in air. 

But she, the Goddess of the nuptial bed, 
Tir'd with her vain devotions for the dead, 
Resolv'd the tainted hand should be repell'd, 
Which incense offer'd, and her altar held: 
Then Iris thus bespoke: Thou faithful maid, 
By whom thy queen's commands are well convey'd, 
Haste to the house of sleep, and bid the God 
Who rules the night by visions with a nod, 
Prepare a dream, in figure, and in form 
Resembling him, who perish'd in the storm; 
This form before Alcyone present, 
To make her certain of the sad event. 

Indu'd with robes of various hue she flies, 
And flying draws an arch (a segment of the skies): 
Then leaves her bending bow, and from the steep 
Descends, to search the silent house of sleep. 

Near the Cymmerians, in his dark abode, 
Deep in a cavern, dwells the drowzy God; 
Whose gloomy mansion nor the rising sun, 
Nor setting, visits, nor the lightsome noon; 
But lazy vapours round the region fly, 
Perpetual twilight, and a doubtful sky: 
No crowing cock does there his wings display, 
Nor with his horny bill provoke the day; 
Nor watchful dogs, nor the more wakeful geese, 
Disturb with nightly noise the sacred peace; 
Nor beast of Nature, nor the tame are nigh, 
Nor trees with tempests rock'd, nor human cry; 
But safe repose without an air of breath 
Dwells here, and a dumb quiet next to death. 

An arm of Lethe, with a gentle flow 
Arising upwards from the rock below, 
The palace moats, and o'er the pebbles creeps, 
And with soft murmurs calls the coming sleeps. 
Around its entry nodding poppies grow, 
And all cool simples that sweet rest bestow; 
Night from the plants their sleepy virtue drains, 
And passing, sheds it on the silent plains: 
No door there was th' unguarded house to keep, 
On creaking hinges turn'd, to break his sleep. 

But in the gloomy court was rais'd a bed, 
Stuff'd with black plumes, and on an ebon-sted: 
Black was the cov'ring too, where lay the God, 
And slept supine, his limbs display'd abroad: 
About his head fantastick visions fly, 
Which various images of things supply, 
And mock their forms; the leaves on trees not more, 
Nor bearded ears in fields, nor sands upon the shore. 

The virgin ent'ring bright, indulg'd the day 
To the brown cave, and brush'd the dreams away: 
The God disturb'd with this new glare of light, 
Cast sudden on his face, unseal'd his sight, 
And rais'd his tardy head, which sunk again, 
And sinking, on his bosom knock'd his chin; 
At length shook off himself, and ask'd the dame, 
(And asking yawn'd) for what intent she came. 

To whom the Goddess thus: O sacred rest, 
Sweet pleasing sleep, of all the Pow'rs the best! 
O peace of mind, repairer of decay, 
Whose balms renew the limbs to labours of the day, 
Care shuns thy soft approach, and sullen flies away! 
Adorn a dream, expressing human form, 
The shape of him who suffer'd in the storm, 
And send it flitting to the Trachin court, 
The wreck of wretched Ceyx to report: 
Before his queen bid the pale spectre stand, 
Who begs a vain relief at Juno's hand. 
She said, and scarce awake her eyes could keep, 
Unable to support the fumes of sleep; 
But fled, returning by the way she went, 
And swerv'd along her bow with swift ascent. 

The God, uneasy 'till he slept again, 
Resolv'd at once to rid himself of pain; 
And, tho' against his custom, call'd aloud, 
Exciting Morpheus from the sleepy crowd: 
Morpheus, of all his numerous train, express'd 
The shape of man, and imitated best; 
The walk, the words, the gesture could supply, 
The habit mimick, and the mein bely; 
Plays well, but all his action is confin'd, 
Extending not beyond our human kind. 
Another, birds, and beasts, and dragons apes, 
And dreadful images, and monster shapes: 
This demon, Icelos, in Heav'n's high hall 
The Gods have nam'd; but men Phobetor call. 
A third is Phantasus, whose actions roul 
On meaner thoughts, and things devoid of soul; 
Earth, fruits, and flow'rs he represents in dreams, 
And solid rocks unmov'd, and running streams. 
These three to kings, and chiefs their scenes display, 
The rest before th' ignoble commons play. 
Of these the chosen Morpheus is dispatch'd; 
Which done, the lazy monarch, over-watch'd, 
Down from his propping elbow drops his head, 
Dissolv'd in sleep, and shrinks within his bed. 

Darkling the demon glides, for flight prepar'd, 
So soft, that scarce his fanning wings are heard. 
To Trachin, swift as thought, the flitting shade, 
Thro' air his momentary journey made: 
Then lays aside the steerage of his wings, 
Forsakes his proper form, assumes the king's; 
And pale, as death, despoil'd of his array, 
Into the queen's apartment takes his way, 
And stands before the bed at dawn of day: 
Unmov'd his eyes, and wet his beard appears; 
And shedding vain, but seeming real tears; 
The briny waters dropping from his hairs. 
Then staring on her with a ghastly look, 
And hollow voice, he thus the queen bespoke. 

Know'st thou not me? Not yet, unhappy wife? 
Or are my features perish'd with my life? 
Look once again, and for thy husband lost, 
Lo all that's left of him, thy husband's ghost! 
Thy vows for my return were all in vain, 
The stormy south o'ertook us in the main, 
And never shalt thou see thy living lord again. 
Bear witness, Heav'n, I call'd on thee in death, 
And while I call'd, a billow stop'd my breath. 
Think not, that flying fame reports my fate; 
I present, I appear, and my own wreck relate. 
Rise, wretched widow, rise; nor undeplor'd 
Permit my soul to pass the Stygian ford; 
But rise, prepar'd in black, to mourn thy perish'd lord.

Thus said the player-God; and adding art 
Of voice and gesture, so perform'd his part, 
She thought (so like her love the shade appears) 
That Ceyx spake the words, and Ceyx shed the tears; 
She groan'd, her inward soul with grief opprest, 
She sigh'd, she wept, and sleeping beat her breast; 
Then stretch'd her arms t' embrace his body bare; 
Her clasping arms inclose but empty air: 
At this, not yet awake, she cry'd, O stay; 
One is our fate, and common is our way! 

So dreadful was the dream, so loud she spoke, 
That starting sudden up, the slumber broke: 
Then cast her eyes around, in hope to view 
Her vanish'd lord, and find the vision true: 
For now the maids, who waited her commands, 
Ran in with lighted tapers in their hands. 
Tir'd with the search, not finding what she seeks, 
With cruel blows she pounds her blubber'd cheeks; 
Then from her beaten breast the linnen tare, 
And cut the golden caul that bound her hair. 
Her nurse demands the cause; with louder cries 
She prosecutes her griefs, and thus replies. 

No more Alcyone; she suffer'd death 
With her lov'd lord, when Ceyx lost his breath: 
No flatt'ry, no false comfort, give me none, 
My shipwreck'd Ceyx is for ever gone: 
I saw, I saw him manifest in view, 
His voice, his figure, and his gestures knew: 
His lustre lost, and ev'ry living grace, 
Yet I retain'd the features of his face; 
Tho' with pale cheeks, wet beard, and dropping hair, 
None but my Ceyx could appear so fair: 
I would have strain'd him with a strict embrace, 
But thro' my arms he slipt, and vanish'd from the place:

There, ev'n just there he stood; and as she spoke, 
Where last the spectre was she cast her look: 
Fain would she hope, and gaz'd upon the ground, 
If any printed footsteps might be found. 

Then sigh'd, and said: This I too well foreknew, 
And my prophetick fears presag'd too true: 
'Twas what I begg'd, when with a bleeding heart 
I took my leave, and suffer'd thee to part; 
Or I to go along, or thou to stay, 
Never, ah never to divide our way! 
Happier for me, that all our hours assign'd 
Together we had liv'd; ev'n not in death disjoin'd! 
So had my Ceyx still been living here, 
Or with my Ceyx I had perish'd there: 
Now I die absent, in the vast profound; 
And me, without my self, the seas have drown'd. 
The storms were not so cruel: should I strive 
To lengthen life, and such a grief survive; 
But neither will I strive, nor wretched thee 
In death forsake, but keep thee company. 
If not one common sepulchre contains 
Our bodies, or one urn our last remains, 
Yet Ceyx and Alcyone shall join, 
Their names remember'd in one common line. 

No farther voice her mighty grief affords, 
For sighs come rushing in betwixt her words, 
And stop'd her tongue; but what her tongue deny'd, 
Soft tears, and groans, and dumb complaints supply'd. 

'Twas morning; to the port she takes her way, 
And stands upon the margin of the sea: 
That place, that very spot of ground she sought, 
Or thither by her destiny was brought, 
Where last he stood: and while she sadly said, 
'Twas here he left me, lingring here delay'd 
His parting kiss, and there his anchors weigh'd. 

Thus speaking, while her thoughts past actions trace, 
And call to mind, admonish'd by the place, 
Sharp at her utmost ken she cast her eyes, 
And somewhat floating from afar descries: 
It seems a corps a-drift to distant sight, 
But at a distance who could judge aright? 
It wafted nearer yet, and then she knew, 
That what before she but surmis'd, was true: 
A corps it was, but whose it was, unknown, 
Yet mov'd, howe'er, she made the cause her own. 
Took the bad omen of a shipwreck'd man, 
As for a stranger wept, and thus began. 

Poor wretch, on stormy seas to lose thy life, 
Unhappy thou, but more thy widow'd wife; 
At this she paus'd: for now the flowing tide 
Had brought the body nearer to the side: 
The more she looks, the more her fears increase, 
At nearer sight; and she's her self the less: 
Now driv'n ashore, and at her feet it lies, 
She knows too much in knowing whom she sees: 
Her husband's corps; at this she loudly shrieks, 
'Tis he, 'tis he, she cries, and tears her cheeks, 
Her hair, and vest; and stooping to the sands, 
About his neck she cast her trembling hands. 

And is it thus, o dearer than my life, 
Thus, thus return'st thou to thy longing wife! 
She said, and to the neighbouring mole she strode, 
(Rais'd there to break th' incursions of the flood). 

Headlong from hence to plunge her self she springs, 
But shoots along, supported on her wings; 
A bird new-made, about the banks she plies, 
Not far from shore, and short excursions tries; 
Nor seeks in air her humble flight to raise, 
Content to skim the surface of the seas: 
Her bill tho' slender, sends a creaking noise, 
And imitates a lamentable voice. 
Now lighting where the bloodless body lies, 
She with a fun'ral note renews her cries: 
At all her stretch, her little wings she spread, 
And with her feather'd arms embrac'd the dead: 
Then flick'ring to his palid lips, she strove 
To print a kiss, the last essay of love. 
Whether the vital touch reviv'd the dead, 
Or that the moving waters rais'd his head 
To meet the kiss, the vulgar doubt alone; 
For sure a present miracle was shown. 
The Gods their shapes to winter-birds translate, 
But both obnoxious to their former fate. 
Their conjugal affection still is ty'd, 
And still the mournful race is multiply'd: 
They bill, they tread; Alcyone compress'd, 
Sev'n days sits brooding on her floating nest: 
A wintry queen: her sire at length is kind, 
Calms ev'ry storm, and hushes ev'ry wind; 
Prepares his empire for his daughter's ease, 
And for his hatching nephews smooths the seas. 

These some old man sees wanton in the air, 
And praises the unhappy constant pair. 
Then to his friend the long-neck'd corm'rant shows, 
The former tale reviving others' woes: 
That sable bird, he cries, which cuts the flood 
With slender legs, was once of royal blood; 
His ancestors from mighty Tros proceed, 
The brave Laomedon, and Ganymede 
(Whose beauty tempted Jove to steal the boy), 
And Priam, hapless prince! who fell with Troy: 
Himself was Hector's brother, and (had Fate 
But giv'n this hopeful youth a longer date) 
Perhaps had rival'd warlike Hector's worth, 
Tho' on the mother's side of meaner birth; 
Fair Alyxothoe, a country maid, 
Bare Aesacus by stealth in Ida's shade. 
He fled the noisy town, and pompous court, 
Lov'd the lone hills, and simple rural sport. 
And seldom to the city would resort. 
Yet he no rustick clownishness profest, 
Nor was soft love a stranger to his breast: 
The youth had long the nymph Hesperie woo'd, 
Oft thro' the thicket, or the mead pursu'd: 
Her haply on her father's bank he spy'd, 
While fearless she her silver tresses dry'd; 
Away she fled: not stags with half such speed, 
Before the prowling wolf, scud o'er the mead; 
Not ducks, when they the safer flood forsake, 
Pursu'd by hawks, so swift regain the lake. 
As fast he follow'd in the hot career; 
Desire the lover wing'd, the virgin fear. 
A snake unseen now pierc'd her heedless foot; 
Quick thro' the veins the venom'd juices shoot: 
She fell, and 'scap'd by death his fierce pursuit; 
Her lifeless body, frighted, he embrac'd, 
And cry'd, Not this I dreaded, but thy haste: 
O had my love been less, or less thy fear! 
The victory, thus bought, is far too dear. 
Accursed snake! yet I more curs'd than he! 
He gave the wound; the cause was given by me. 
Yet none shall say, that unreveng'd you dy'd. 
He spoke; then climb'd a cliff's o'er-hanging side, 
And, resolute, leap'd on the foaming tide. 
Tethys receiv'd him gently on the wave; 
The death he sought deny'd, and feathers gave. 
Debarr'd the surest remedy of grief, 
And forc'd to live, he curst th' unask'd relief. 
Then on his airy pinions upward flies, 
And at a second fall successless tries; 
The downy plume a quick descent denies. 
Enrag'd, he often dives beneath the wave, 
And there in vain expects to find a grave. 
His ceaseless sorrow for th' unhappy maid, 
Meager'd his look, and on his spirits prey'd. 
Still near the sounding deep he lives; his name 
From frequent diving and emerging came.

Priam, to whom the story was unknown, 
As dead, deplor'd his metamorphos'd son: 
A cenotaph his name, and title kept, 
And Hector round the tomb, with all his brothers, wept. 
This pious office Paris did not share; 
Absent alone; and author of the war, 
Which, for the Spartan queen, the Grecians drew 
T' avenge the rape; and Asia to subdue. 
A thousand ships were mann'd, to sail the sea: 
Nor had their just resentments found delay, 
Had not the winds, and waves oppos'd their way. 
At Aulis, with united pow'rs they meet, 
But there, cross-winds or calms detain'd the fleet. 
Now, while they raise an altar on the shore, 
And Jove with solemn sacrifice adore; 
A boding sign the priests and people see: 
A snake of size immense ascends a tree, 
And, in the leafie summit, spy'd a nest, 
Which o'er her callow young, a sparrow press'd. 
Eight were the birds unfledg'd; their mother flew, 
And hover'd round her care; but still in view: 
'Till the fierce reptile first devour'd the brood, 
Then seiz'd the flutt'ring dam, and drunk her blood. 
This dire ostent, the fearful people view; 
Calchas alone, by Phoebus taught, foreknew 
What Heav'n decreed; and with a smiling glance, 
Thus gratulates to Greece her happy chance: 
O Argives, we shall conquer: Troy is ours, 
But long delays shall first afflict our pow'rs: 
Nine years of labour, the nine birds portend; 
The tenth shall in the town's destruction end. 

The serpent, who his maw obscene had fill'd, 
The branches in his curl'd embraces held: 
But, as in spires he stood, he turn'd to stone: 
The stony snake retain'd the figure still his own. 

Yet, not for this, the wind-bound navy weigh'd; 
Slack were their sails; and Neptune disobey'd. 
Some thought him loth the town should be destroy'd, 
Whose building had his hands divine employ'd: 
Not so the seer; who knew, and known foreshow'd, 
The virgin Phoebe, with a virgin's blood 
Must first be reconcil'd: the common cause 
Prevail'd; and pity yielding to the laws, 
Fair Iphigenia the devoted maid 
Was, by the weeping priests, in linnen-robes array'd; 
All mourn her fate; but no relief appear'd; 
The royal victim bound, the knife already rear'd: 
When that offended Pow'r, who caus'd their woe, 
Relenting ceas'd her wrath; and stop'd the coming blow. 
A mist before the ministers she cast, 
And, in the virgin's room, a hind she plac'd. 
Th' oblation slain, and Phoebe, reconcil'd, 
The storm was hush'd, and dimpled ocean smil'd: 
A favourable gale arose from shore, 
Which to the port desir'd, the Graecian gallies bore. 

Full in the midst of this created space, 
Betwixt Heav'n, Earth, and skies, there stands a place, 
Confining on all three, with triple bound; 
Whence all things, tho' remote, are view'd around; 
And thither bring their undulating sound. 
The palace of loud Fame, her seat of pow'r, 
Plac'd on the summet of a lofty tow'r; 
A thousand winding entries long and wide, 
Receive of fresh reports a flowing tide. 
A thousand crannies in the walls are made; 
Nor gate, nor bars exclude the busie trade. 
'Tis built of brass, the better to diffuse 
The spreading sounds, and multiply the news: 
Where eccho's in repeated eccho's play: 
A mart for ever full, and open night and day. 
Nor silence is within, nor voice express, 
But a deaf noise of sounds, that never cease. 
Confus'd and chiding, like the hollow roar 
Of tides, receding from th' insulted shore, 
Or like the broken thunder heard from far, 
When Jove at distance drives the rouling war. 
The courts are fill'd with a tumultuous din 
Of crouds, or issuing forth, or entring in: 
A thorough-fare of news: where some devise 
Things never heard, some mingle truth with lies; 
The troubled air with empty sounds they beat, 
Intent to hear, and eager to repeat. 
Error sits brooding there, with added train 
Of vain credulity, and joys as vain: 
Suspicion, with sedition join'd, are near, 
And rumours rais'd, and murmurs mix'd, and panique fear.

Fame sits aloft, and sees the subject ground, 
And seas about, and skies above; enquiring all around. 

The Goddess gives th' alarm; and soon is known 
The Grecian fleet descending on the town. 
Fix'd on defence, the Trojans are not slow 
To guard their shore, from an expected foe. 
They meet in fight: by Hector's fatal hand 
Protesilaus falls, and bites the strand: 
Which with expence of blood the Grecians won; 
And prov'd the strength unknown of Priam's son. 
And to their cost the Trojan leaders felt 
The Grecian heroes; and what deaths they dealt. 

From these first onsets, the Sigaean shore 
Was strew'd with carcasses, and stain'd with gore: 
Neptunian Cygnus troops of Greeks had slain; 
Achilles in his carr had scour'd the plain, 
And clear'd the Trojan ranks: where-e'er he fought, 
Cygnus, or Hector, through the fields he sought: 
Cygnus he found; on him his force essay'd: 
For Hector was to the tenth year delay'd. 
His white-main'd steeds, that bow'd beneath the yoke, 
He chear'd to courage, with a gentle stroke; 
Then urg'd his fiery chariot on the foe; 
And rising shook his lance; in act to throw. 
But first he cry'd, O youth, be proud to bear 
Thy death, ennobled by Pelides' spear. 
The lance pursu'd the voice without delay, 
Nor did the whizzing weapon miss the way; 
But pierc'd his cuirass, with such fury sent, 
And sign'd his bosom with a purple dint. 
At this the seed of Neptune: Goddess-born, 
For ornament, not use, these arms are worn; 
This helm, and heavy buckler, I can spare; 
As only decorations of the war: 
So Mars is arm'd for glory, not for need. 
'Tis somewhat more from Neptune to proceed, 
Than from a daughter of the sea to spring: 
Thy sire is mortal; mine is ocean's king. 
Secure of death, I shou'd contemn thy dart, 
Tho' naked; and impassible depart: 
He said, and threw: the trembling weapon pass'd 
Through nine bull-hides, each under other plac'd, 
On his broad shield; and stuck within the last. 
Achilles wrench'd it out; and sent again 
The hostile gift: the hostile gift was vain. 
He try'd a third, a tough well-chosen spear; 
Th' inviolable body stood sincere, 
Though Cygnus then did no defence provide, 
But scornful offer'd his unshielded side. 

Not otherwise th' impatient hero far'd, 
Than as a bull incompass'd with a guard, 
Amid the Circus roars, provok'd from far 
By sight of scarlet, and a sanguine war: 
They quit their ground, his bended horns elude; 
In vain pursuing, and in vain pursu'd: 

Before to farther fight he wou'd advance, 
He stood considering, and survey'd his lance. 
Doubts if he wielded not a wooden spear 
Without a point: he look'd, the point was there. 
This is my hand, and this my lance, he said; 
By which so many thousand foes are dead, 
O whither is their usual virtue fled! 
I had it once; and the Lyrnessian wall, 
And Tenedos, confess'd it in their fall. 
Thy streams, Caicus, rowl'd a crimson-flood; 
And Thebes ran red with her own natives' blood. 
Twice Telephus employ'd their piercing steel, 
To wound him first, and afterward to heal. 
The vigour of this arm was never vain: 
And that my wonted prowess I retain, 
Witness these heaps of slaughter on the plain. 
He said; and, doubtful of his former deeds, 
To some new tryal of his force proceeds. 
He chose Menoetes from among the rest; 
At him he launch'd his spear, and pierc'd his breast: 
On the hard earth the Lycian knock'd his head, 
And lay supine; and forth the spirit fled. 

Then thus the hero: Neither can I blame 
The hand, or jav'lin; both are still the same. 
The same I will employ against this foe, 
And wish but with the same success to throw. 
So spoke the chief; and while he spoke he threw; 
The weapon with unerring fury flew, 
At his left shoulder aim'd: nor entrance found; 
But back, as from a rock, with swift rebound 
Harmless return'd: a bloody mark appear'd, 
Which with false joy the flatter'd hero chear'd. 
Wound there was none; the blood that was in view, 
The lance before from slain Menoetes drew. 

Headlong he leaps from off his lofty car, 
And in close fight on foot renews the war. 
Raging with high disdain, repeats his blows; 
Nor shield, nor armour can their force oppose; 
Huge cantlets of his buckler strew the ground, 
And no defence in his bor'd arms is found, 
But on his flesh, no wound or blood is seen; 
The sword it self is blunted on the skin. 

This vain attempt the chief no longer bears; 
But round his hollow temples and his ears 
His buckler beats: the son of Neptune, stunn'd 
With these repeated buffets, quits his ground; 
A sickly sweat succeeds, and shades of night; 
Inverted Nature swims before his sight: 
Th' insulting victor presses on the more, 
And treads the steps the vanquish'd trod before, 
Nor rest, nor respite gives. A stone there lay 
Behind his trembling foe, and stopp'd his way: 
Achilles took th' advantage which he found, 
O'er-turn'd, and push'd him backward on the ground, 
His buckler held him under, while he press'd, 
With both his knees, above his panting breast. 
Unlac'd his helm: about his chin the twist 
He ty'd; and soon the strangled soul dismiss'd. 

With eager haste he went to strip the dead: 
The vanish'd body from his arms was fled. 
His sea-God sire, t' immortalize his frame, 
Had turn'd it to a bird that bears his name. 

A truce succeeds the labours of this day, 
And arms suspended with a long delay. 
While Trojan walls are kept with watch and ward; 
The Greeks before their trenches mount the guard; 
The feast approach'd; when to the blue-ey'd maid 
His vows for Cygnus slain the victor paid, 
And a white heyfer on her altar laid. 
The reeking entrails on the fire they threw, 
And to the Gods the grateful odour flew. 
Heav'n had its part in sacrifice: the rest 
Was broil'd, and roasted for the future feast. 
The chief-invited guests were set around! 
And hunger first asswag'd, the bowls were crown'd, 
Which in deep draughts their cares, and labours drown'd.

The mellow harp did not their ears employ: 
And mute was all the warlike symphony: 
Discourse, the food of souls, was their delight, 
And pleasing chat prolong'd the summer's night. 
The subject, deeds of arms; and valour shown, 
Or on the Trojan side, or on their own. 
Of dangers undertaken, fame atchiev'd, 
They talk'd by turns; the talk by turns reliev'd. 
What things but these could fierce Achilles tell, 
Or what cou'd fierce Achilles hear so well? 
The last great act perform'd, of Cygnus slain, 
Did most the martial audience entertain: 
Wondring to find a body free by Fate 
From steel; and which cou'd ev'n that steel rebate: 
Amaz'd, their admiration they renew; 
And scarce Pelides cou'd believe it true. 

Then Nestor thus: what once this age has known, 
In fated Cygnus, and in him alone, 
These eyes have seen in Caeneus long before; 
Whose body not a thousand swords cou'd bore. 
Caeneus, in courage, and in strength, excell'd; 
And still his Othrys with his fame is fill'd: 
But what did most his martial deeds adorn 
(Though since he chang'd his sex) a woman born. 

A novelty so strange, and full of Fate, 
His list'ning audience ask'd him to relate. 
Achilles thus commends their common sute: 
O father, first for prudence in repute, 
Tell, with that eloquence, so much thy own, 
What thou hast heard, or what of Caeneus known: 
What was he, whence his change of sex begun, 
What trophies, join'd in wars with thee, he won? 
Who conquer'd him, and in what fatal strife 
The youth, without a wound, cou'd lose his life? 

Neleides then: Though tardy age, and time, 
Have shrunk my sinews, and decay'd my prime; 
Though much I have forgotten of my store, 
Yet not exhausted, I remember more. 
Of all that arms atchiev'd, or peace design'd, 
That action still is fresher in my mind, 
Than ought beside. If reverend age can give 
To faith a sanction, in my third I live. 

'Twas in my second cent'ry, I survey'd 
Young Caenis, then a fair Thessalian maid: 
Caenis the bright, was born to high command; 
A princess, and a native of thy land, 
Divine Achilles; every tongue proclaim'd 
Her beauty, and her eyes all hearts inflam'd. 
Peleus, thy sire, perhaps had sought her bed, 
Among the rest; but he had either led 
Thy mother then; or was by promise ty'd; 
But she to him, and all, alike her love deny'd. 

It was her fortune once to take her way 
Along the sandy margin of the sea: 
The Pow'r of ocean view'd her as she pass'd, 
And, lov'd as soon as seen, by force embrac'd. 
So Fame reports. Her virgin-treasure seiz'd, 
And his new joys, the ravisher so pleas'd, 
That thus, transported, to the nymph he cry'd; 
Ask what thou wilt, no pray'r shall be deny'd. 
This also Fame relates: the haughty fair, 
Who not the rape ev'n of a God cou'd bear, 
This answer, proud, return'd: To mighty wrongs 
A mighty recompence, of right, belongs. 
Give me no more to suffer such a shame; 
But change the woman, for a better name; 
One gift for all: she said; and while she spoke, 
A stern, majestick, manly tone she took. 
A man she was: and as the Godhead swore, 
To Caeneus turn'd, who Caenis was before. 

To this the lover adds, without request, 
No force of steel shou'd violate his breast. 
Glad of the gift, the new-made warrior goes; 
And arms among the Greeks, and longs for equal foes. 

Now brave Perithous, bold Ixion's son, 
The love of fair Hippodame had won. 
The cloud-begotten race, half men, half beast, 
Invited, came to grace the nuptial feast: 
In a cool cave's recess the treat was made, 
Whose entrance, trees with spreading boughs o'er-shade 
They sate: and summon'd by the bridegroom, came, 
To mix with those, the Lapythaean name: 
Nor wanted I: the roofs with joy resound: 
And Hymen, Io Hymen, rung around. 
Rais'd altars shone with holy fires; the bride, 
Lovely her self (and lovely by her side 
A bevy of bright nymphs, with sober grace), 
Came glitt'ring like a star, and took her place. 
Her heav'nly form beheld, all wish'd her joy; 
And little wanted; but in vain, their wishes all employ.

For one, most brutal, of the brutal brood, 
Or whether wine, or beauty fir'd his blood, 
Or both at once, beheld with lustful eyes 
The bride; at once resolv'd to make his prize. 
Down went the board; and fastning on her hair, 
He seiz'd with sudden force the frighted fair. 
'Twas Eurytus began: his bestial kind 
His crime pursu'd; and each as pleas'd his mind, 
Or her, whom chance presented, took: the feast 
An image of a taken town express'd. 

The cave resounds with female shrieks; we rise, 
Mad with revenge to make a swift reprise: 
And Theseus first, What phrenzy has possess'd, 
O Eurytus, he cry'd, thy brutal breast, 
To wrong Perithous, and not him alone, 
But while I live, two friends conjoyn'd in one? 

To justifie his threat, he thrusts aside 
The crowd of centaurs; and redeems the bride: 
The monster nought reply'd: for words were vain, 
And deeds cou'd only deeds unjust maintain; 
But answers with his hand, and forward press'd, 
With blows redoubled, on his face, and breast. 
An ample goblet stood, of antick mold, 
And rough with figures of the rising gold; 
The hero snatch'd it up, and toss'd in air 
Full at the front of the foul ravisher. 
He falls; and falling vomits forth a flood 
Of wine, and foam, and brains, and mingled blood. 
Half roaring, and half neighing through the hall, 
Arms, arms, the double-form'd with fury call; 
To wreak their brother's death: a medley-flight 
Of bowls, and jars, at first supply the fight, 
Once instruments of feasts; but now of Fate; 
Wine animates their rage, and arms their hate. 

Bold Amycus, from the robb'd vestry brings 
The chalices of Heav'n; and holy things 
Of precious weight: a sconce that hung on high, 
With tapers fill'd, to light the sacristy, 
Torn from the cord, with his unhallow'd hand 
He threw amid the Lapythaean band. 
On Celadon the ruin fell; and left 
His face of feature, and of form bereft: 
So, when some brawny sacrificer knocks, 
Before an altar led, an offer'd ox, 
His eyes-balls rooted out, are thrown to ground; 
His nose, dismantled, in his mouth is found; 
His jaws, cheeks, front, one undistinguish'd wound. 

This, Belates, th' avenger, cou'd not brook; 
But, by the foot, a maple board he took; 
And hurl'd at Amycus; his chin it bent 
Against his chest, and down the centaur sent: 
Whom sputtring bloody teeth, the second blow 
Of his drawn sword, dispatch'd to shades below. 

Grineus was near; and cast a furious look 
On the side-altar, cens'd with sacred smoke, 
And bright with flaming fires; The Gods, he cry'd, 
Have with their holy trade our hands supply'd: 
Why use we not their gifts? Then from the floor 
An altar stone he heav'd, with all the load it bore: 
Altar, and altar's freight together slew, 
Where thickest throng'd the Lapythaean crew: 
And, at once, Broteas and Oryus flew. 
Oryus' mother, Mycale, was known 
Down from her sphere to draw the lab'ring moon. 

Exadius cry'd, Unpunish'd shall not go 
This fact, if arms are found against the foe. 
He look'd about, where on a pine were spread 
The votive horns of a stag's branching head: 
At Grineus these he throws; so just they fly, 
That the sharp antlers stuck in either eye: 
Breathless, and blind he fell; with blood besmear'd; 
His eye-balls beaten out, hung dangling on his beard. 
Fierce Rhoetus, from the hearth a burning brand 
Selects, and whirling waves; 'till, from his hand 
The fire took flame; then dash'd it from the right, 
On fair Charaxus' temples, near the sight: 
The whistling pest came on, and pierc'd the bone, 
And caught the yellow hair, that shrivel'd while it shone.

Caught, like dry stubble fir'd; or like seerwood; 
Yet from the wound ensu'd no purple flood; 
But look'd a bubbling mass of frying blood. 
His blazing locks sent forth a crackling sound; 
And hiss'd, like red hot ir'n within the smithy drown'd.

The wounded warrior shook his flaming hair, 
Then (what a team of horse could hardly rear) 
He heaves the threshold stone, but could not throw; 
The weight itself forbad the threaten'd blow; 
Which dropping from his lifted arms, came down 
Full on Cometes' head; and crush'd his crown. 
Nor Rhoetus then retain'd his joy; but said, 
So by their fellows may our foes be sped; 
Then, with redoubled strokes he plies his head: 
The burning lever not deludes his pains: 
But drives the batter'd skull within the brains. 

Thus flush'd, the conqueror, with force renew'd, 
Evagrus, Dryas, Corythus, pursu'd: 
First, Corythus, with downy cheeks, he slew; 
Whose fall, when fierce Evagrus had in view, 
He cry'd, What palm is from a beardless prey? 
Rhoetus prevents what more he had to say; 
And drove within his mouth the fi'ry death, 
Which enter'd hissing in, and choak'd his breath. 
At Dryas next he flew: but weary chance, 
No longer wou'd the same success advance. 
For while he whirl'd in fiery circles round 
The brand, a sharpen'd stake strong Dryas found; 
And in the shoulder's joint inflicts the wound. 
The weapon stuck; which, roaring out with pain, 
He drew; nor longer durst the fight maintain, 
But turn'd his back, for fear; and fled amain. 
With him fled Orneus, with like dread possess'd, 
Thaumas, and Medon wounded in the breast; 
And Mermeros, in the late race renown'd, 
Now limping ran, and tardy with his wound. 
Pholus, and Melaneus from fight withdrew, 
And Abas maim'd, who boars encountring slew: 
And Augur Asbolos, whose art in vain, 
From fight dissuaded the four-footed train, 
Now beat the hoof with Nessus on the plain; 
But to his fellow cry'd, Be safely slow, 
Thy death deferr'd is due to great Alcides' bow. 

Mean-time strong Dryas urg'd his chance so well, 
That Lycidas, Areos, Imbreus fell; 
All, one by one, and fighting face to face: 
Crenaeus fled, to fall with more disgrace: 
For, fearful, while he look'd behind, he bore, 
Betwixt his nose, and front, the blow before. 
Amid the noise, and tumult of the fray, 
Snoring, and drunk with wine, Aphidas lay. 
Ev'n then the bowl within his hand he kept, 
And on a bear's rough hide securely slept. 
Him Phorbas with his flying dart transfix'd; 
Take thy next draught, with Stygian waters mix'd, 
And sleep thy fill, th' insulting victor cry'd; 
Surpriz'd with death unfelt, the centaur dy'd; 
The ruddy vomit, as he breath'd his soul 
Repass'd his throat, and fill'd his empty bowl. 

I saw Petraeus' arms employ'd around 
A well-grown oak, to root it from the ground. 
This way, and that, he wrench'd the fibrous bands; 
The trunk was like a sappling, in his hands, 
And still obey'd the bent: while thus he stood, 
Perithous' dart drove on; and nail'd him to the wood; 
Lycus, and Chromis fell, by him oppress'd: 
Helops, and Dictis added to the rest 
A nobler palm: Helops, through either ear 
Transfix'd, receiv'd the penetrating spear. 
This Dictis saw; and, seiz'd with sudden fright, 
Leapt headlong from the hill of steepy height; 
And crush'd an ash beneath, that cou'd not bear his weight.

The shatter'd tree receives his fall; and strikes, 
Within his full-blown paunch, the sharpen'd spikes. 
Strong Aphareus had heav'd a mighty stone, 
The fragment of a rock; and wou'd have thrown; 
But Theseus, with a club of harden'd oak, 
The cubit-bone of the bold centaur broke; 
And left him maim'd; nor seconded the stroke. 
Then leapt on tall Bianor's back (who bore 
No mortal burden but his own, before); 
Press'd with his knees his sides; the double man, 
His speed with spurs increas'd, unwilling ran. 
One hand the hero fastn'd on his locks; 
His other ply'd him with repeated strokes. 
The club rung round his ears, and batter'd brows; 
He falls; and lashing up his heels, his rider throws. 

The same Herculean arms, Nedymnus wound; 
And lay by him Lycotas on the ground, 
And Hippasus, whose beard his breast invades; 
And Ripheus, haunter of the woodland shades: 
And Thereus, us'd with mountain-bears to strive, 
And from their dens to draw th' indignant beasts alive. 

Demoleon cou'd not bear this hateful sight, 
Or the long fortune of th' Athenian knight: 
But pull'd with all his force, to disengage 
From Earth a pine, the product of an age: 
The root stuck fast: the broken trunk he sent 
At Theseus; Theseus frustrates his intent, 
And leaps aside; by Pallas warn'd, the blow 
To shun (for so he said; and we believ'd it so). 
Yet not in vain th' enormous weight was cast; 
Which Crantor's body sunder'd at the waist: 
Thy father's 'squire, Achilles, and his care; 
Whom conquer'd in the Polopeian war, 
Their king, his present ruin to prevent, 
A pledge of peace implor'd, to Peleus sent. 

Thy sire, with grieving eyes, beheld his Fate; 
And cry'd, Not long, lov'd Crantor, shalt thou wait 
Thy vow'd revenge. At once he said, and threw 
His ashen-spear; which quiver'd, as it flew; 
With all his force, and all his soul apply'd; 
The sharp point enter'd in the centaur's side: 
Both hands, to wrench it out, the monster join'd; 
And wrench'd it out; but left the steel behind; 
Stuck in his lungs it stood: inrag'd he rears 
His hoofs, and down to ground thy father bears. 
Thus trampled under foot, his shield defends 
His head; his other hand the lance portends. 
Ev'n while he lay extended on the dust, 
He sped the centaur, with one single thrust. 
Two more his lance before transfix'd from far; 
And two, his sword had slain, in closer war. 
To these was added Dorylas, who spread 
A bull's two goring horns around his head. 
With these he push'd; in blood already dy'd, 
Him fearless, I approach'd; and thus defy'd: 
Now, monster, now, by proof it shall appear, 
Whether thy horns are sharper, or my spear. 
At this, I threw: for want of other ward, 
He lifted up his hand, his front to guard. 
His hand it pass'd; and fix'd it to his brow: 
Loud shouts of ours attend the lucky blow. 
Him Peleus finish'd, with a second wound, 
Which thro' the navel pierc'd: he reel'd around; 
And dragg'd his dangling bowels on the ground. 
Trod what he drag'd; and what he trod, he crush'd: 
And to his mother-Earth, with empty belly, rush'd. 

Nor cou'd thy form, o Cyllarus, foreflow 
Thy Fate (if form to monsters men allow): 
Just bloom'd thy beard: thy beard of golden hue: 
Thy locks, in golden waves, about thy shoulders flew. 
Sprightly thy look: thy shapes in ev'ry part 
So clean, as might instruct the sculptor's art; 
As far as man extended: where began 
The beast, the beast was equal to the man. 
Add but a horse's head and neck; and he, 
O Castor, was a courser worthy thee. 
So was his back proportion'd for the seat: 
So rose his brawny chest; so swiftly mov'd his feet. 
Coal-black his colour, but like jett it shone; 
His legs, and flowing tail were white alone. 
Belov'd by many maidens of his kind; 
But fair Hylonome possess'd his mind; 
Hylonome, for features, and for face, 
Excelling all the nymphs of double race: 
Nor less her blandishments, than beauty, move; 
At once both loving, and confessing love. 
For him she dress'd: for him, with female care 
She comb'd, and set in curls, her auburn hair. 
Of roses, violets, and lillies mix'd, 
And sprigs of flowing rosemary betwixt, 
She form'd the chaplet, that adorn'd her front: 
In waters of the Pegasaean fount, 
And in the streams that from the fountain play, 
She wash'd her face; and bath'd her twice a-day. 
The scarf of furs, that hung below her side, 
Was ermin, or the panther's spotted pride; 
Spoils of no common beast: with equal flame 
They lov'd: their silvan pleasures were the same: 
All day they hunted: and when day expir'd, 
Together to some shady cave retir'd: 
Invited to the nuptials, both repair: 
And, side by side, they both engage in war. 

Uncertain from what hand, a flying dart 
At Cyllarus was sent; which pierc'd his heart. 
The jav'lin drawn from out the mortal wound, 
He faints with stagg'ring steps; and seeks the ground: 
The fair within her arms receiv'd his fall, 
And strove his wand'ring spirits to recall: 
And while her hand the streaming blood oppos'd, 
Join'd face to face, his lips with hers she clos'd. 
Stifled with kisses, a sweet death he dies; 
She fills the fields with undistinguish'd cries; 
At least her words were in her clamour drown'd; 
For my stunn'd ears receiv'd no vocal sound. 
In madness of her grief, she seiz'd the dart 
New-drawn, and reeking from her lover's heart; 
To her bare bosom the sharp point apply'd; 
And wounded fell; and falling by his side, 
Embrac'd him in her arms; and thus embracing dy'd. 

Ev'n still methinks, I see Phaeocomes; 
Strange was his habit, and as odd his dress. 
Six lions' hides, with thongs together fast, 
His upper part defended to his waist: 
And where man ended, the continued vest, 
Spread on his back, the houss and trappings of a beast. 
A stump too heavy for a team to draw 
(It seems a fable, tho' the fact I saw); 
He threw at Pholon; the descending blow 
Divides the skull, and cleaves his head in two. 
The brains, from nose, and mouth, and either ear, 
Came issuing out, as through a colendar 
The curdled milk; or from the press the whey, 
Driv'n down by weight above, is drain'd away. 

But him, while stooping down to spoil the slain, 
Pierc'd through the paunch, I tumbled on the plain. 
Then Chthonyus, and Teleboas I slew: 
A fork the former arm'd; a dart his fellow threw. 
The jav'lin wounded me (behold the scar, 
Then was my time to seek the Trojan war; 
Then I was Hector's match in open field; 
But he was then unborn; at least a child: 
Now, I am nothing). I forbear to tell 
By Periphantas how Pyretus fell; 
The centaur by the knight: nor will I stay 
On Amphix, or what deaths he dealt that day: 
What honour, with a pointless lance, he won, 
Stuck in the front of a four-footed man. 
What fame young Macareus obtain'd in fight: 
Or dwell on Nessus, now return'd from flight. 
How prophet Mopsus not alone divin'd, 
Whose valour equal'd his foreseeing mind. 

Already Caeneus, with his conquering hand, 
Had slaughter'd five the boldest of their band. 
Pyrachmus, Helymus, Antimachus, 
Bromus the brave, and stronger Stiphelus, 
Their names I number'd, and remember well, 
No trace remaining, by what wounds they fell. 

Laitreus, the bulki'st of the double race, 
Whom the spoil'd arms of slain Halesus grace, 
In years retaining still his youthful might, 
Though his black hairs were interspers'd with white, 
Betwixt th' imbattled ranks began to prance, 
Proud of his helm, and Macedonian lance; 
And rode the ring around; that either hoast 
Might hear him, while he made this empty boast: 
And from a strumpet shall we suffer shame? 
For Caenis still, not Caeneus, is thy name: 
And still the native softness of thy kind 
Prevails; and leaves the woman in thy mind; 
Remember what thou wert; what price was paid 
To change thy sex; to make thee not a maid: 
And but a man in shew; go, card and spin; 
And leave the business of the war to men. 

While thus the boaster exercis'd his pride, 
The fatal spear of Caeneus reach'd his side: 
Just in the mixture of the kinds it ran; 
Betwixt the neather beast, and upper man: 
The monster mad with rage, and stung with smart, 
His lance directed at the hero's heart: 
It struck; but bounded from his harden'd breast, 
Like hail from tiles, which the safe house invest. 
Nor seem'd the stroke with more effect to come, 
Than a small pebble falling on a drum. 
He next his fauchion try'd, in closer fight; 
But the keen fauchion had no pow'r to bite. 
He thrust; the blunted point return'd again: 
Since downright blows, he cry'd, and thrusts are vain, 
I'll prove his side; in strong embraces held 
He prov'd his side; his side the sword repell'd: 
His hollow belly eccho'd to the stroke, 
Untouch'd his body, as a solid rock; 
Aim'd at his neck at last, the blade in shivers broke. 

Th' impassive knight stood idle, to deride 
His rage, and offer'd oft his naked side; 
At length, Now monster, in thy turn, he cry'd, 
Try thou the strength of Caeneus: at the word 
He thrust; and in his shoulder plung'd the sword. 
Then writh'd his hand; and as he drove it down, 
Deep in his breast, made many wounds in one. 

The centaurs saw, inrag'd, th' unhop'd success; 
And rushing on in crowds, together press; 
At him, and him alone, their darts they threw: 
Repuls'd they from his fated body flew. 
Amaz'd they stood; 'till Monichus began, 
O shame, a nation conquer'd by a man! 
A woman-man! yet more a man is he, 
Than all our race; and what he was, are we. 
Now, what avail our nerves? th' united force, 
Of two the strongest creatures, man and horse; 
Nor Goddess-born; nor of Ixion's seed 
We seem (a lover built for Juno's bed); 
Master'd by this half man. Whole mountains throw 
With woods at once, and bury him below. 
This only way remains. Nor need we doubt 
To choak the soul within; though not to force it out: 
Heap weights, instead of wounds. He chanc'd to see 
Where southern storms had rooted up a tree; 
This, rais'd from Earth, against the foe he threw; 
Th' example shewn, his fellow-brutes pursue. 
With forest-loads the warrior they invade; 
Othrys, and Pelion soon were void of shade; 
And spreading groves were naked mountains made. 
Press'd with the burden, Caeneus pants for breath; 
And on his shoulders bears the wooden death. 
To heave th' intolerable weight he tries; 
At length it rose above his mouth and eyes: 
Yet still he heaves; and, strugling with despair, 
Shakes all aside, and gains a gulp of air: 
A short relief, which but prolongs his pain; 
He faints by fits; and then respires again: 
At last, the burden only nods above, 
As when an earthquake stirs th' Idaean grove. 
Doubtful his death: he suffocated seem'd, 
To most; but otherwise our Mopsus deem'd, 
Who said he saw a yellow bird arise 
From out the piles, and cleave the liquid skies: 
I saw it too, with golden feathers bright; 
Nor e'er before beheld so strange a sight. 
Whom Mopsus viewing, as it soar'd around 
Our troop, and heard the pinions' rattling sound, 
All hail, he cry'd, thy country's grace and love! 
Once first of men below, now first of birds above. 
Its author to the story gave belief: 
For us, our courage was increas'd by grief: 
Asham'd to see a single man, pursu'd 
With odds, to sink beneath a multitude, 
We push'd the foe: and forc'd to shameful flight, 
Part fell, and part escap'd by favour of the night. 

This tale, by Nestor told, did much displease 
Tlepolemus, the seed of Hercules: 
For, often he had heard his father say, 
That he himself was present at the fray; 
And more than shar'd the glories of the day. 

Old Chronicle, he said, among the rest, 
You might have nam'd Alcides at the least: 
Is he not worth your praise? The Pylian prince 
Sigh'd ere he spoke; then made this proud defence. 
My former woes in long oblivion drown'd, 
I wou'd have lost; but you renew the wound: 
Better to pass him o'er, than to relate 
The cause I have your mighty sire to hate. 
His fame has fill'd the world, and reach'd the sky 
(Which, oh, I wish, with truth, I cou'd deny!); 
We praise not Hector; though his name, we know, 
Is great in arms; 'tis hard to praise a foe. 

He, your great father, levell'd to the ground 
Messenia's tow'rs: nor better fortune found 
Elis, and Pylos; that a neighb'ring state, 
And this my own: both guiltless of their fate. 

To pass the rest, twelve, wanting one, he slew; 
My brethren, who their birth from Neleus drew, 
All youths of early promise, had they liv'd; 
By him they perish'd: I alone surviv'd. 
The rest were easie conquest: but the fate 
Of Periclymenos, is wondrous to relate. 
To him, our common grandsire of the main 
Had giv'n to change his form, and chang'd, resume again.

Vary'd at pleasure, every shape he try'd; 
And in all beasts, Alcides still defy'd: 
Vanquish'd on Earth, at length he soar'd above; 
Chang'd to the bird, that bears the bolt of Jove: 
The new-dissembled eagle, now endu'd 
With beak, and pounces, Hercules pursu'd, 
And cuff'd his manly cheeks, and tore his face; 
Then, safe retir'd, and tour'd in empty space. 
Alcides bore not long his flying foe; 
But bending his inevitable bow, 
Reach'd him in air, suspended as he stood; 
And in his pinion fix'd the feather'd wood. 
Light was the wound; but in the sinew hung 
The point, and his disabled wing unstrung. 
He wheel'd in air, and stretch'd his vans in vain; 
His vans no longer cou'd his flight sustain: 
For while one gather'd wind, one unsupply'd 
Hung drooping down, nor pois'd his other side. 
He fell: the shaft that slightly was impress'd, 
Now from his heavy fall with weight increas'd, 
Drove through his neck, aslant, he spurns the ground, 
And the soul issues through the weazon's wound. 

Now, brave commander of the Rhodian seas, 
What praise is due from me, to Hercules? 
Silence is all the vengeance I decree 
For my slain brothers; but 'tis peace with thee. 

Thus with a flowing tongue old Nestor spoke: 
Then, to full bowls each other they provoke: 
At length, with weariness, and wine oppress'd, 
They rise from table; and withdraw to rest. 

The sire of Cygnus, monarch of the main, 
Mean-time, laments his son, in battel slain, 
And vows the victor's death; nor vows in vain. 
For nine long years the smother'd pain he bore 
(Achilles was not ripe for Fate before): 
Then when he saw the promis'd hour was near, 
He thus bespoke the God, that guides the year: 
Immortal offspring of my brother Jove; 
My brightest nephew, and whom best I love, 
Whose hands were join'd with mine, to raise the wall 
Of tott'ring Troy, now nodding to her fall, 
Dost thou not mourn our pow'r employ'd in vain; 
And the defenders of our city slain? 
To pass the rest, could noble Hector lie 
Unpity'd, drag'd around his native Troy? 
And yet the murd'rer lives: himself by far 
A greater plague, than all the wasteful war: 
He lives; the proud Pelides lives, to boast 
Our town destroy'd, our common labour lost. 
O, could I meet him! But I wish too late: 
To prove my trident is not in his Fate! 
But let him try (for that's allow'd) thy dart, 
And pierce his only penetrable part. 

Apollo bows to the superior throne; 
And to his uncle's anger, adds his own. 
Then in a cloud involv'd, he takes his flight, 
Where Greeks, and Trojans mix'd in mortal fight; 
And found out Paris, lurking where he stood, 
And stain'd his arrows with plebeian blood: 
Phoebus to him alone the God confess'd, 
Then to the recreant knight, he thus address'd. 
Dost thou not blush, to spend thy shafts in vain 
On a degenerate, and ignoble train? 
If fame, or better vengeance be thy care, 
There aim: and, with one arrow, end the war. 

He said; and shew'd from far the blazing shield 
And sword, which, but Achilles, none cou'd wield; 
And how he mov'd a God, and mow'd the standing field. 
The deity himself directs aright 
Th' invenom'd shaft; and wings the fatal flight. 

Thus fell the foremost of the Grecian name; 
And he, the base adult'rer, boasts the fame. 
A spectacle to glad the Trojan train; 
And please old Priam, after Hector slain. 
If by a female hand he had foreseen 
He was to die, his wish had rather been 
The lance, and double ax of the fair warriour queen. 
And now the terror of the Trojan field, 
The Grecian honour, ornament, and shield, 
High on a pile, th' unconquer'd chief is plac'd, 
The God that arm'd him first, consum'd at last. 
Of all the mighty man, the small remains 
A little urn, and scarcely fill'd, contains. 
Yet great in Homer, still Achilles lives; 
And equal to himself, himself survives. 

His buckler owns its former lord; and brings 
New cause of strife, betwixt contending kings; 
Who worthi'st after him, his sword to wield, 
Or wear his armour, or sustain his shield. 
Ev'n Diomede sat mute, with down-cast eyes; 
Conscious of wanted worth to win the prize: 
Nor Menelaus presum'd these arms to claim, 
Nor he the king of men, a greater name. 
Two rivals only rose: Laertes' son, 
And the vast bulk of Ajax Telamon: 
The king, who cherish'd each with equal love, 
And from himself all envy wou'd remove, 
Left both to be determin'd by the laws; 
And to the Graecian chiefs transferr'd the cause. 

The chiefs were set; the soldiers crown'd the field: 
To these the master of the seven-fold shield 
Upstarted fierce: and kindled with disdain. 
Eager to speak, unable to contain 
His boiling rage, he rowl'd his eyes around 
The shore, and Graecian gallies hall'd a-ground. 
Then stretching out his hands, O Jove, he cry'd, 
Must then our cause before the fleet be try'd? 
And dares Ulysses for the prize contend, 
In sight of what he durst not once defend? 
But basely fled that memorable day, 
When I from Hector's hands redeem'd the flaming prey. 
So much 'tis safer at the noisie bar 
With words to flourish, than ingage in war. 
By diff'rent methods we maintain our right, 
Nor am I made to talk, nor he to fight. 
In bloody fields I labour to be great; 
His arms are a smooth tongue, and soft deceit: 
Nor need I speak my deeds, for those you see, 
The sun, and day are witnesses for me. 
Let him who fights unseen, relate his own, 
And vouch the silent stars, and conscious moon. 
Great is the prize demanded, I confess, 
But such an abject rival makes it less; 
That gift, those honours, he but hop'd to gain, 
Can leave no room for Ajax to be vain: 
Losing he wins, because his name will be 
Ennobled by defeat, who durst contend with me. 
Were my known valour question'd, yet my blood 
Without that plea wou'd make my title good: 
My sire was Telamon, whose arms, employ'd 
With Hercules, these Trojan walls destroy'd; 
And who before with Jason sent from Greece, 
In the first ship brought home the golden fleece. 
Great Telamon from Aeacus derives 
His birth (th' inquisitor of guilty lives 
In shades below; where Sisyphus, whose son 
This thief is thought, rouls up the restless heavy stone),

Just Aeacus, the king of Gods above 
Begot: thus Ajax is the third from Jove. 
Nor shou'd I seek advantage from my line, 
Unless (Achilles) it was mix'd with thine: 
As next of kin, Achilles' arms I claim; 
This fellow wou'd ingraft a foreign name 
Upon our stock, and the Sisyphian seed 
By fraud, and theft asserts his father's breed: 
Then must I lose these arms, because I came 
To fight uncall'd, a voluntary name, 
Nor shunn'd the cause, but offer'd you my aid? 
While he long lurking was to war betray'd: 
Forc'd to the field he came, but in the reer; 
And feign'd distraction to conceal his fear: 
'Till one more cunning caught him in the snare 
(Ill for himself); and dragg'd him into war. 
Now let a hero's arms a coward vest, 
And he who shunn'd all honours, gain the best: 
And let me stand excluded from my right, 
Robb'd of my kinsman's arms, who first appear'd in fight,

Better for us, at home had he remain'd, 
Had it been true the madness which he feign'd, 
Or so believ'd; the less had been our shame, 
The less his counsell'd crime, which brands the Grecian name;

Nor Philoctetes had been left inclos'd 
In a bare isle, to wants and pains expos'd, 
Where to the rocks, with solitary groans, 
His suff'rings, and our baseness he bemoans: 
And wishes (so may Heav'n his wish fulfill) 
The due reward to him, who caus'd his ill. 
Now he, with us to Troy's destruction sworn, 
Our brother of the war, by whom are born 
Alcides' arrows, pent in narrow bounds, 
With cold and hunger pinch'd, and pain'd with wounds, 
To find him food and cloathing, must employ 
Against the birds the shafts due to the fate of Troy. 
Yet still he lives, and lives from treason free, 
Because he left Ulysses' company; 
Poor Palamede might wish, so void of aid, 
Rather to have been left, than so to death betray'd. 
The coward bore the man immortal spight, 
Who sham'd him out of madness into fight: 
Nor daring otherwise to vent his hate, 
Accus'd him first of treason to the state; 
And then for proof produc'd the golden store, 
Himself had hidden in his tent before: 
Thus of two champions he depriv'd our host, 
By exile one, and one by treason lost. 
Thus fights Ulysses, thus his fame extends, 
A formidable man, but to his friends: 
Great, for what greatness is in words, and sound, 
Ev'n faithful Nestor less in both is found: 
But that he might without a rival reign, 
He left this faithful Nestor on the plain; 
Forsook his friend ev'n at his utmost need, 
Who tir'd, and tardy with his wounded steed, 
Cry'd out for aid, and call'd him by his name; 
But cowardice has neither ears nor shame; 
Thus fled the good old man, bereft of aid, 
And, for as much as lay in him, betray'd: 
That this is not a fable forg'd by me, 
Like one of his, an Ulyssean lie, 
I vouch ev'n Diomede, who tho' his friend, 
Cannot that act excuse, much less defend: 
He call'd him back aloud, and tax'd his fear; 
And sure enough he heard, but durst not hear. 

The Gods with equal eyes on mortal look, 
He justly was forsaken, who forsook: 
Wanted that succour, he refus'd to lend, 
Found ev'ry fellow such another friend: 
No wonder, if he roar'd that all might hear; 
His elocution was increas'd by fear: 
I heard, I ran, I found him out of breath, 
Pale, trembling, and half dead with fear of death. 
Though he had judg'd himself by his own laws, 
And stood condemn'd, I help'd the common cause: 
With my broad buckler hid him from the foe 
(Ev'n the shield trembled as he lay below); 
And from impending Fate the coward freed: 
Good Heav'n forgive me for so bad a deed! 
If still he will persist, and urge the strife, 
First let him give me back his forfeit life: 
Let him return to that opprobrious field; 
Again creep under my protecting shield: 
Let him lie wounded, let the foe be near, 
And let his quiv'ring heart confess his fear; 
There put him in the very jaws of Fate; 
And let him plead his cause in that estate: 
And yet when snatch'd from death, when from below 
My lifted shield I loos'd, and let him go; 
Good Heav'ns, how light he rose, with what a bound 
He sprung from earth, forgetful of his wound; 
How fresh, how eager then his feet to ply; 
Who had not strength to stand, had speed to fly! 

Hector came on, and brought the Gods along; 
Fear seiz'd alike the feeble, and the strong: 
Each Greek was an Ulysses; such a dread 
Th' approach, and ev'n the sound of Hector bred: 
Him, flesh'd with slaughter, and with conquest crown'd, 
I met, and over-turn'd him to the ground; 
When after, matchless as he deem'd in might, 
He challeng'd all our host to single fight; 
All eyes were fix'd on me: the lots were thrown; 
But for your champion I was wish'd alone: 
Your vows were heard; we fought, and neither yield; 
Yet I return'd unvanquish'd from the field. 
With Jove to friend, th' insulting Trojan came, 
And menac'd us with force, our fleet with flame. 
Was it the strength of this tongue-valiant lord, 
In that black hour, that sav'd you from the sword? 
Or was my breast expos'd alone, to brave 
A thousand swords, a thousand ships to save? 
The hopes of your return! And can you yield, 
For a sav'd fleet, less than a single shield? 
Think it no boast, o Grecians, if I deem 
These arms want Ajax, more than Ajax them: 
Or, I with them an equal honour share; 
They honour'd to be worn, and I to wear. 
Will he compare my courage with his sleight? 
As well he may compare the day with night. 
Night is indeed the province of his reign: 
Yet all his dark exploits no more contain 
Than a spy taken, and a sleeper slain; 
A priest made pris'ner, Pallas made a prey: 
But none of all these actions done by day: 
Nor ought of these was done, and Diomede away. 
If on such petty merits you confer 
So vast a prize, let each his portion share; 
Make a just dividend; and if not all, 
The greater part to Diomede will fall. 
But why for Ithacus such arms as those, 
Who naked, and by night invades his foes? 
The glitt'ring helm by moonlight will proclaim 
The latent robber, and prevent his game: 
Nor cou'd he hold his tott'ring head upright 
Beneath that morion, or sustain the weight; 
Nor that right arm cou'd toss the beamy lance; 
Much less the left that ampler shield advance; 
Pond'rous with precious weight, and rough with cost 
Of the round world in rising gold emboss'd. 
That orb would ill become his hand to wield, 
And look as for the gold he stole the shield; 
Which, shou'd your error on the wretch bestow, 
It would not frighten, but allure the foe: 
Why asks he, what avails him not in fight, 
And wou'd but cumber, and retard his flight, 
In which his only excellence is plac'd? 
You give him death, that intercept his haste. 
Add, that his own is yet a maiden-shield, 
Nor the least dint has suffer'd in the field, 
Guiltless of fight: mine batter'd, hew'd, and bor'd, 
Worn out of service, must forsake his lord, 
What farther need of words our right to scan? 
My arguments are deeds, let action speak the man. 
Since from a champion's arms the strife arose, 
Go cast the glorious prize amid the foes; 
Then send us to redeem both arms, and shield, 
And let him wear, who wins 'em in the field. 

He said: a murmur from a multitude, 
Or somewhat like a stifled shout, ensu'd: 
'Till from his seat arose Laertes' son, 
Look'd down a while, and paus'd, e'er he begun; 
Then, to th' expecting audience, rais'd his look, 
And not without prepar'd attention spoke: 
Soft was his tone, and sober was his face; 
Action his words, and words his action grace. 

If Heav'n, my lords, had heard our common pray'r, 
These arms had caus'd no quarrel for an heir; 
Still great Achilles had his own possess'd, 
And we with great Achilles had been bless'd; 
But since hard Fate, and Heav'n's severe decree, 
Have ravish'd him away from you, and me 
(At this he sigh'd, and wip'd his eyes, and drew, 
Or seem'd to draw, some drops of kindly dew), 
Who better can succeed Achilles lost, 
Than he, who gave Achilles to your hoast? 
This only I request, that neither he 
May gain, by being what he seems to be, 
A stupid thing; nor I may lose the prize, 
By having sense, which Heav'n to him denies: 
Since great or small, the talent I enjoy'd 
Was ever in the common cause employ'd; 
Nor let my wit, and wonted eloquence, 
Which often has been us'd in your defense, 
And in my own, this only time be brought 
To bear against my self, and deem'd a fault. 
Make not a crime, where Nature made it none; 
For ev'ry man may freely use his own. 
The deeds of long-descended ancestors 
Are but by grace of imputation ours, 
Theirs in effect; but since he draws his line 
From Jove, and seems to plead a right divine; 
From Jove, like him, I claim my pedigree, 
And am descended in the same degree: 
My sire Laertes was Arcesius' heir, 
Arcesius was the son of Jupiter: 
No parricide, no banish'd man, is known 
In all my line: let him excuse his own. 
Hermes ennobles too my mother's side, 
By both my parents to the Gods ally'd. 
But not because that on the female part 
My blood is better, dare I claim desert, 
Or that my sire from parricide is free; 
But judge by merit betwixt him, and me: 
The prize be to the best; provided yet 
That Ajax for a while his kin forget, 
And his great sire, and greater uncle's name, 
To fortifie by them his feeble claim: 
Be kindred and relation laid aside, 
And honour's cause by laws of honour try'd: 
For if he plead proximity of blood; 
That empty title is with ease withstood. 
Peleus, the hero's sire, more nigh than he, 
And Pyrrhus, his undoubted progeny, 
Inherit first these trophies of the field; 
To Scyros, or to Pthia, send the shield: 
And Teucer has an uncle's right; yet he 
Waves his pretensions, nor contends with me. 

Then since the cause on pure desert is plac'd, 
Whence shall I take my rise, what reckon last? 
I not presume on ev'ry act to dwell, 
But take these few, in order as they fell. 

Thetis, who knew the Fates, apply'd her care 
To keep Achilles in disguise from war; 
And 'till the threatning influence was past, 
A woman's habit on the hero cast: 
All eyes were cozen'd by the borrow'd vest, 
And Ajax (never wiser than the rest) 
Found no Pelides there: at length I came 
With proffer'd wares to this pretended dame; 
She, not discover'd by her mien, or voice, 
Betray'd her manhood by her manly choice; 
And while on female toys her fellows look, 
Grasp'd in her warlike hand, a javelin shook; 
Whom, by this act reveal'd, I thus bespoke: 
O Goddess-born! resist not Heav'n's decree, 
The fall of Ilium is reserv'd for thee; 
Then seiz'd him, and produc'd in open light, 
Sent blushing to the field the fatal knight. 
Mine then are all his actions of the war; 
Great Telephus was conquer'd by my spear, 
And after cur'd: to me the Thebans owe, 
Lesbos, and Tenedos, their overthrow; 
Syros and Cylla: not on all to dwell, 
By me Lyrnesus, and strong Chrysa fell: 
And since I sent the man who Hector slew, 
To me the noble Hector's death is due: 
Those arms I put into his living hand, 
Those arms, Pelides dead, I now demand. 

When Greece was injur'd in the Spartan prince, 
And met at Aulis to avenge th' offence, 
'Twas a dead calm, or adverse blasts, that reign'd, 
And in the port the wind-bound fleet detain'd: 
Bad signs were seen, and oracles severe 
Were daily thunder'd in our gen'ral's ear; 
That by his daughter's blood we must appease 
Diana's kindled wrath, and free the seas. 
Affection, int'rest, fame, his heart assail'd: 
But soon the father o'er the king prevail'd: 
Bold, on himself he took the pious crime, 
As angry with the Gods, as they with him. 
No subject cou'd sustain their sov'reign's look, 
'Till this hard enterprize I undertook: 
I only durst th' imperial pow'r controul, 
And undermin'd the parent in his soul; 
Forc'd him t' exert the king for common good, 
And pay our ransom with his daughter's blood. 
Never was cause more difficult to plead, 
Than where the judge against himself decreed: 
Yet this I won by dint of argument; 
The wrongs his injur'd brother underwent, 
And his own office, sham'd him to consent. 

'Tis harder yet to move the mother's mind, 
And to this heavy task was I design'd: 
Reasons against her love I knew were vain; 
I circumvented whom I could not gain: 
Had Ajax been employ'd, our slacken'd sails 
Had still at Aulis waited happy gales. 

Arriv'd at Troy, your choice was fix'd on me, 
A fearless envoy, fit for a bold embassy: 
Secure, I enter'd through the hostile court, 
Glitt'ring with steel, and crowded with resort: 
There, in the midst of arms, I plead our cause, 
Urge the foul rape, and violated laws; 
Accuse the foes, as authors of the strife, 
Reproach the ravisher, demand the wife. 
Priam, Antenor, and the wiser few, 
I mov'd; but Paris, and his lawless crew 
Scarce held their hands, and lifted swords; but stood 
In act to quench their impious thirst of blood: 
This Menelaus knows; expos'd to share 
With me the rough preludium of the war. 

Endless it were to tell, what I have done, 
In arms, or council, since the siege begun: 
The first encounter's past, the foe repell'd, 
They skulk'd within the town, we kept the field. 
War seem'd asleep for nine long years; at length 
Both sides resolv'd to push, we try'd our strength 
Now what did Ajax, while our arms took breath, 
Vers'd only in the gross mechanick trade of death? 
If you require my deeds, with ambush'd arms 
I trapp'd the foe, or tir'd with false alarms; 
Secur'd the ships, drew lines along the plain, 
The fainting chear'd, chastis'd the rebel-train, 
Provided forage, our spent arms renew'd; 
Employ'd at home, or sent abroad, the common cause pursu'd.

The king, deluded in a dream by Jove, 
Despair'd to take the town, and order'd to remove. 
What subject durst arraign the Pow'r supream, 
Producing Jove to justifie his dream? 
Ajax might wish the soldiers to retain 
From shameful flight, but wishes were in vain: 
As wanting of effect had been his words, 
Such as of course his thundring tongue affords. 
But did this boaster threaten, did he pray, 
Or by his own example urge their stay? 
None, none of these: but ran himself away. 
I saw him run, and was asham'd to see; 
Who ply'd his feet so fast to get aboard, as he? 
Then speeding through the place, I made a stand, 
And loudly cry'd, O base degenerate band, 
To leave a town already in your hand! 
After so long expence of blood, for fame, 
To bring home nothing, but perpetual shame! 
These words, or what I have forgotten since 
(For grief inspir'd me then with eloquence), 
Reduc'd their minds; they leave the crowded port, 
And to their late forsaken camp resort: 
Dismay'd the council met: this man was there, 
But mute, and not recover'd of his fear: 
Thersites tax'd the king, and loudly rail'd, 
But his wide opening mouth with blows I seal'd. 
Then, rising, I excite their souls to fame, 
And kindle sleeping virtue into flame. 
From thence, whatever he perform'd in fight 
Is justly mine, who drew him back from flight. 

Which of the Grecian chiefs consorts with thee? 
But Diomede desires my company, 
And still communicates his praise with me. 
As guided by a God, secure he goes, 
Arm'd with my fellowship, amid the foes: 
And sure no little merit I may boast, 
Whom such a man selects from such an hoast; 
Unforc'd by lots I went without affright, 
To dare with him the dangers of the night: 
On the same errand sent, we met the spy 
Of Hector, double-tongu'd, and us'd to lie; 
Him I dispatch'd, but not 'till undermin'd, 
I drew him first to tell, what treach'rous Troy design'd:

My task perform'd, with praise I had retir'd, 
But not content with this, to greater praise aspir'd: 
Invaded Rhesus, and his Thracian crew, 
And him, and his, in their own strength I slew; 
Return'd a victor, all my vows compleat, 
With the king's chariot, in his royal seat: 
Refuse me now his arms, whose fiery steeds 
Were promis'd to the spy for his nocturnal deeds: 
Yet let dull Ajax bear away my right, 
When all his days out-balance this one night. 

Nor fought I darkling still: the sun beheld 
With slaughter'd Lycians when I strew'd the field: 
You saw, and counted as I pass'd along, 
Alastor, Chromius, Ceranos the strong, 
Alcander, Prytanis, and Halius, 
Noemon, Charopes, and Ennomus; 
Coon, Chersidamas; and five beside, 
Men of obscure descent, but courage try'd: 
All these this hand laid breathless on the ground; 
Nor want I proofs of many a manly wound: 
All honest, all before: believe not me; 
Words may deceive, but credit what you see. 

At this he bar'd his breast, and show'd his scars, 
As of a furrow'd field, well plow'd with wars; 
Nor is this part unexercis'd, said he; 
That gyant-bulk of his from wounds is free: 
Safe in his shield he fears no foe to try, 
And better manages his blood, than I: 
But this avails me not; our boaster strove 
Not with our foes alone, but partial Jove, 
To save the fleet: this I confess is true 
(Nor will I take from any man his due): 
But thus assuming all, he robs from you. 
Some part of honour to your share will fall, 
He did the best indeed, but did not all. 
Patroclus in Achilles' arms, and thought 
The chief he seem'd, with equal ardour fought; 
Preserv'd the fleet, repell'd the raging fire, 
And forc'd the fearful Trojans to retire. 

But Ajax boasts, that he was only thought 
A match for Hector, who the combat sought: 
Sure he forgets the king, the chiefs, and me: 
All were as eager for the fight, as he: 
He but the ninth, and not by publick voice, 
Or ours preferr'd, was only Fortune's choice: 
They fought; nor can our hero boast th' event, 
For Hector from the field unwounded went. 

Why am I forc'd to name that fatal day, 
That snatch'd the prop and pride of Greece away? 
I saw Pelides sink, with pious grief, 
And ran in vain, alas! to his relief; 
For the brave soul was fled: full of my friend 
I rush'd amid the war, his relicks to defend: 
Nor ceas'd my toil, 'till I redeem'd the prey, 
And, loaded with Achilles, march'd away: 
Those arms, which on these shoulders then I bore, 
'Tis just you to these shoulders should restore. 
You see I want not nerves, who cou'd sustain 
The pond'rous ruins of so great a man: 
Or if in others equal force you find, 
None is endu'd with a more grateful mind. 

Did Thetis then, ambitious in her care, 
These arms thus labour'd for her son prepare; 
That Ajax after him the heav'nly gift shou'd wear! 
For that dull soul to stare with stupid eyes, 
On the learn'd unintelligible prize! 
What are to him the sculptures of the shield, 
Heav'n's planets, Earth, and Ocean's watry field? 
The Pleiads, Hyads; less, and greater Bear, 
Undipp'd in seas; Orion's angry star; 
Two diff'ring cities, grav'd on either hand; 
Would he wear arms he cannot understand? 

Beside, what wise objections he prepares 
Against my late accession to the wars? 
Does not the fool perceive his argument 
Is with more force against Achilles bent? 
For if dissembling be so great a crime, 
The fault is common, and the same in him: 
And if he taxes both of long delay, 
My guilt is less, who sooner came away. 
His pious mother, anxious for his life, 
Detain'd her son; and me, my pious wife. 
To them the blossoms of our youth were due, 
Our riper manhood we reserv'd for you. 
But grant me guilty, 'tis not much my care, 
When with so great a man my guilt I share: 
My wit to war the matchless hero brought, 
But by this fool I never had been caught. 

Nor need I wonder, that on me he threw 
Such foul aspersions, when he spares not you: 
If Palamede unjustly fell by me, 
Your honour suffer'd in th' unjust decree: 
I but accus'd, you doom'd: and yet he dy'd, 
Convinc'd of treason, and was fairly try'd: 
You heard not he was false; your eyes beheld 
The traytor manifest; the bribe reveal'd. 

That Philoctetes is on Lemnos left, 
Wounded, forlorn, of human aid bereft, 
Is not my crime, or not my crime alone; 
Defend your justice, for the fact's your own: 
'Tis true, th' advice was mine; that staying there 
He might his weary limbs with rest repair, 
From a long voyage free, and from a longer war. 
He took the counsl, and he lives at least; 
Th' event declares I counsell'd for the best: 
Though faith is all in ministers of state; 
For who can promise to be fortunate? 
Now since his arrows are the Fate of Troy, 
Do not my wit, or weak address, employ; 
Send Ajax there, with his persuasive sense, 
To mollifie the man, and draw him thence: 
But Xanthus shall run backward; Ida stand 
A leafless mountain; and the Grecian band 
Shall fight for Troy; if, when my councils fail, 
The wit of heavy Ajax can prevail. 

Hard Philoctetes, exercise thy spleen 
Against thy fellows, and the king of men; 
Curse my devoted head, above the rest, 
And wish in arms to meet me breast to breast: 
Yet I the dang'rous task will undertake, 
And either die my self, or bring thee back. 

Nor doubt the same success, as when before 
The Phrygian prophet to these tents I bore, 
Surpriz'd by night, and forc'd him to declare 
In what was plac'd the fortune of the war, 
Heav'n's dark decrees, and answers to display, 
And how to take the town, and where the secret lay: 
Yet this I compass'd, and from Troy convey'd 
The fatal image of their guardian-maid; 
That work was mine; for Pallas, though our friend, 
Yet while she was in Troy, did Troy defend. 
Now what has Ajax done, or what design'd? 
A noisie nothing, and an empty wind. 
If he be what he promises in show, 
Why was I sent, and why fear'd he to go? 
Our boasting champion thought the task not light 
To pass the guards, commit himself to night; 
Not only through a hostile town to pass, 
But scale, with steep ascent, the sacred place; 
With wand'ring steps to search the cittadel, 
And from the priests their patroness to steal: 
Then through surrounding foes to force my way, 
And bear in triumph home the heavn'ly prey; 
Which had I not, Ajax in vain had held, 
Before that monst'rous bulk, his sev'nfold shield. 
That night to conquer Troy I might be said, 
When Troy was liable to conquest made. 

Why point'st thou to my partner of the war? 
Tydides had indeed a worthy share 
In all my toil, and praise; but when thy might 
Our ships protected, did'st thou singly fight? 
All join'd, and thou of many wert but one; 
I ask'd no friend, nor had, but him alone: 
Who, had he not been well assur'd, that art, 
And conduct were of war the better part, 
And more avail'd than strength, my valiant friend 
Had urg'd a better right, than Ajax can pretend: 
As good at least Eurypilus may claim, 
And the more mod'rate Ajax of the name: 
The Cretan king, and his brave charioteer, 
And Menelaus bold with sword, and spear: 
All these had been my rivals in the shield, 
And yet all these to my pretensions yield. 
Thy boist'rous hands are then of use, when I 
With this directing head those hands apply. 
Brawn without brain is thine: my prudent care 
Foresees, provides, administers the war: 
Thy province is to fight; but when shall be 
The time to fight, the king consults with me: 
No dram of judgment with thy force is join'd: 
Thy body is of profit, and my mind. 
By how much more the ship her safety owes 
To him who steers, than him that only rows; 
By how much more the captain merits praise, 
Than he who fights, and fighting but obeys; 
By so much greater is my worth than thine, 
Who canst but execute, what I design. 
What gain'st thou, brutal man, if I confess 
Thy strength superior, when thy wit is less? 
Mind is the man: I claim my whole desert, 
From the mind's vigour, and th' immortal part. 

But you, o Grecian chiefs, reward my care, 
Be grateful to your watchman of the war: 
For all my labours in so long a space, 
Sure I may plead a title to your grace: 
Enter the town, I then unbarr'd the gates, 
When I remov'd their tutelary Fates. 
By all our common hopes, if hopes they be 
Which I have now reduc'd to certainty; 
By falling Troy, by yonder tott'ring tow'rs, 
And by their taken Gods, which now are ours; 
Or if there yet a farther task remains, 
To be perform'd by prudence, or by pains; 
If yet some desp'rate action rests behind, 
That asks high conduct, and a dauntless mind; 
If ought be wanting to the Trojan doom, 
Which none but I can manage, and o'ercome, 
Award, those arms I ask, by your decree: 
Or give to this, what you refuse to me. 

He ceas'd: and ceasing with respect he bow'd, 
And with his hand at once the fatal statue show'd. 
Heav'n, air and ocean rung, with loud applause, 
And by the gen'ral vote he gain'd his cause. 
Thus conduct won the prize, when courage fail'd, 
And eloquence o'er brutal force prevail'd. 

He who cou'd often, and alone, withstand 
The foe, the fire, and Jove's own partial hand, 
Now cannot his unmaster'd grief sustain, 
But yields to rage, to madness, and disdain; 
Then snatching out his fauchion, Thou, said he, 
Art mine; Ulysses lays no claim to thee. 
O often try'd, and ever-trusty sword, 
Now do thy last kind office to thy lord: 
'Tis Ajax who requests thy aid, to show 
None but himself, himself cou'd overthrow: 
He said, and with so good a will to die, 
Did to his breast the fatal point apply, 
It found his heart, a way 'till then unknown, 
Where never weapon enter'd, but his own. 
No hands cou'd force it thence, so fix'd it stood, 
'Till out it rush'd, expell'd by streams of spouting blood.

The fruitful blood produc'd a flow'r, which grew 
On a green stem; and of a purple hue: 
Like his, whom unaware Apollo slew: 
Inscrib'd in both, the letters are the same, 
But those express the grief, and these the name. 

The victor with full sails for Lemnos stood 
(Once stain'd by matrons with their husbands' blood), 
Thence great Alcides' fatal shafts to bear, 
Assign'd to Philoctetes' secret care. 
These with their guardian to the Greeks convey'd, 
Their ten years' toil with wish'd success repaid. 
With Troy old Priam falls: his queen survives; 
'Till all her woes compleat, transform'd she grieves 
In borrow'd sounds, nor with an human face, 
Barking tremendous o'er the plains of Thrace. 
Still Ilium's flames their pointed columns raise, 
And the red Hellespont reflects the blaze. 
Shed on Jove's altar are the poor remains 
Of blood, which trickl'd from old Priam's veins. 
Cassandra lifts her hands to Heav'n in vain, 
Drag'd by her sacred hair; the trembling train 
Of matrons to their burning temples fly: 
There to their Gods for kind protection cry; 
And to their statues cling 'till forc'd away, 
The victor Greeks bear off th' invidious prey. 
From those high tow'rs Astyanax is thrown, 
Whence he was wont with pleasure to look down. 
When oft his mother with a fond delight 
Pointed to view his father's rage in fight, 
To win renown, and guard his country's right. 

The winds now call to sea; brisk northern gales 
Sing in the shrowds, and court the spreading sails. 
Farewel, dear Troy, the captive matrons cry; 
Yes, we must leave our long-lov'd native sky. 
Then prostrate on the shore they kiss the sand, 
And quit the smoking ruines of the land. 
Last Hecuba on board, sad sight! appears; 
Found weeping o'er her children's sepulchres: 
Drag'd by Ulysses from her slaughter'd sons, 
Whilst yet she graspt their tombs, and kist their mouldring bones.

Yet Hector's ashes from his urn she bore, 
And in her bosom the sad relique wore: 
Then scatter'd on his tomb her hoary hairs, 
A poor oblation mingled with her tears. 

Oppos'd to Ilium lye the Thracian plains, 
Where Polymestor safe in plenty reigns. 
King Priam to his care commits his son, 
Young Polydore, the chance of war to shun. 
A wise precaution! had not gold, consign'd 
For the child's use, debauch'd the tyrant's mind. 
When sinking Troy to its last period drew, 
With impious hands his royal charge he slew; 
Then in the sea the lifeless coarse is thrown; 
As with the body he the guilt could drown. 

The Greeks now riding on the Thracian shore, 
'Till kinder gales invite, their vessels moor. 
Here the wide-op'ning Earth to sudden view 
Disclos'd Achilles, great as when he drew 
The vital air, but fierce with proud disdain, 
As when he sought Briseis to regain; 
When stern debate, and rash injurious strife 
Unsheath'd his sword, to reach Atrides' life. 
And will ye go? he said. Is then the name 
Of the once great Achilles lost to fame? 
Yet stay, ungrateful Greeks; nor let me sue 
In vain for honours to my Manes due. 
For this just end, Polyxena I doom 
With victim-rites to grace my slighted tomb. 

The phantom spoke; the ready Greeks obey'd, 
And to the tomb led the devoted maid 
Snatch'd from her mother, who with pious care 
Cherish'd this last relief of her despair. 
Superior to her sex, the fearless maid, 
Approach'd the altar, and around survey'd 
The cruel rites, and consecrated knife, 
Which Pyrrhus pointed at her guiltless life, 
Then as with stern amaze intent he stood, 
"Now strike," she said; "now spill my genr'ous blood; 
Deep in my breast, or throat, your dagger sheath, 
Whilst thus I stand prepar'd to meet my death. 
For life on terms of slav'ry I despise: 
Yet sure no God approves this sacrifice. 
O cou'd I but conceal this dire event 
From my sad mother, I should dye content. 
Yet should she not with tears my death deplore, 
Since her own wretched life demands them more. 
But let not the rude touch of man pollute 
A virgin-victim; 'tis a modest suit. 
It best will please, whoe'er demands my blood, 
That I untainted reach the Stygian flood. 
Yet let one short, last, dying prayer be heard; 
To Priam's daughter pay this last regard; 
'Tis Priam's daughter, not a captive, sues; 
Do not the rites of sepulture refuse. 
To my afflicted mother, I implore, 
Free without ransom my dead corpse restore: 
Nor barter me for gain, when I am cold; 
But be her tears the price, if I am sold: 
Time was she could have ransom'd me with gold". 

Thus as she pray'd, one common shower of tears 
Burst forth, and stream'd from ev'ry eye but hers. 
Ev'n the priest wept, and with a rude remorse 
Plung'd in her heart the steel's resistless force. 
Her slacken'd limbs sunk gently to the ground, 
Dauntless her looks, unalter'd by the wound. 
And as she fell, she strove with decent pride 
To hide, what suits a virgin's care to hide. 
The Trojan matrons the pale corpse receive, 
And the whole slaughter'd race of Priam grieve, 
Sad they recount the long disastrous tale; 
Then with fresh tears, thee, royal maid, bewail; 
Thy widow'd mother too, who flourish'd late 
The royal pride of Asia's happier state: 
A captive lot now to Ulysses born; 
Whom yet the victor would reject with scorn, 
Were she not Hector's mother: Hector's fame 
Scarce can a master for his mother claim! 
With strict embrace the lifeless coarse she view'd; 
And her fresh grief that flood of tears renew'd, 
With which she lately mourn'd so many dead; 
Tears for her country, sons, and husband shed. 
With the thick gushing stream she bath'd the wound; 
Kiss'd her pale lips; then weltring on the ground, 
With wonted rage her frantick bosom tore; 
Sweeping her hair amidst the clotted gore; 
Whilst her sad accents thus her loss deplore. 

"Behold a mother's last dear pledge of woe! 
Yes, 'tis the last I have to suffer now. 
Thou, my Polyxena, my ills must crown: 
Already in thy Fate, I feel my own. 
'Tis thus, lest haply of my numerous seed 
One should unslaughter'd fall, even thou must bleed: 
And yet I hop'd thy sex had been thy guard; 
But neither has thy tender sex been spar'd. 
The same Achilles, by whose deadly hate 
Thy brothers fell, urg'd thy untimely fate! 
The same Achilles, whose destructive rage 
Laid waste my realms, has robb'd my childless age. 
When Paris' shafts with Phoebus' certain aid 
At length had pierc'd this dreaded chief, I said, 
Secure of future ills, he can no more: 
But see, he still pursues me as before. 
With rage rekindled his dead ashes burn; 
And his yet murd'ring ghost my wretched house must mourn.

This tyrant's lust of slaughter I have fed 
With large supplies from my too-fruitful bed. 
Troy's tow'rs lye waste; and the wide ruin ends 
The publick woe; but me fresh woe attends. 
Troy still survives to me; to none but me; 
And from its ills I never must be free. 
I, who so late had power, and wealth, and ease, 
Bless'd with my husband, and a large encrease, 
Must now in poverty an exile mourn; 
Ev'n from the tombs of my dead offspring torn: 
Giv'n to Penelope, who proud of spoil, 
Allots me to the loom's ungrateful toil; 
Points to her dames, and crys with scorning mien: 
See Hector's mother, and great Priam's queen! 
And thou, my child, sole hope of all that's lost, 
Thou now art slain, to sooth this hostile ghost. 
Yes, my child falls an offering to my foe! 
Then what am I, who still survive this woe? 
Say, cruel Gods! for what new scenes of death 
Must a poor aged wretch prolong this hated breath? 
Troy fal'n, to whom could Priam happy seem? 
Yet was he so; and happy must I deem 
His death; for O! my child, he saw not thine, 
When he his life did with his Troy resign. 
Yet sure due obsequies thy tomb might grace; 
And thou shalt sleep amidst thy kingly race. 
Alas! my child, such fortune does not wait 
Our suffering house in this abandon'd state. 
A foreign grave, and thy poor mother's tears 
Are all the honours that attend thy herse. 
All now is lost!- Yet no; one comfort more 
Of life remains, my much-lov'd Polydore. 
My youngest hope: here on this coast he lives, 
Nurs'd by the guardian-king, he still survives. 
Then let me hasten to the cleansing flood, 
And wash away these stains of guiltless blood." 

Streit to the shore her feeble steps repair 
With limping pace, and torn dishevell'd hair 
Silver'd with age. "Give me an urn," she cry'd, 
"To bear back water from this swelling tide": 
When on the banks her son in ghastly hue 
Transfix'd with Thracian arrows strikes her view. 
The matrons shriek'd; her big-swoln grief surpast 
The pow'r of utterance; she stood aghast; 
She had nor speech, nor tears to give relief; 
Excess of woe suppress'd the rising grief. 
Lifeless as stone, on Earth she fix'd her eyes; 
And then look'd up to Heav'n with wild surprise. 
Now she contemplates o'er with sad delight 
Her son's pale visage; then her aking sight 
Dwells on his wounds: she varys thus by turns, 
Wild as the mother-lion, when among 
The haunts of prey she seeks her ravish'd young: 
Swift flies the ravisher; she marks his trace, 
And by the print directs her anxious chase. 
So Hecuba with mingled grief, and rage 
Pursues the king, regardless of her age. 
She greets the murd'rer with dissembled joy 
Of secret treasure hoarded for her boy. 
The specious tale th' unwary king betray'd. 
Fir'd with the hopes of prey: "Give quick," he said 
With soft enticing speech, "the promis'd store: 
Whate'er you give, you give to Polydore. 
Your son, by the immortal Gods I swear, 
Shall this with all your former bounty share." 
She stands attentive to his soothing lyes, 
And darts avenging horrour from her eyes. 
Then full resentment fires her boyling blood: 
She springs upon him, 'midst the captive crowd 
(Her thirst of vengeance want of strength supplies): 
Fastens her forky fingers in his eyes: 
Tears out the rooted balls; her rage pursues, 
And in the hollow orbs her hand imbrews. 

The Thracians, fir'd, at this inhuman scene, 
With darts, and stones assail the frantick queen. 
She snarls, and growls, nor in an human tone; 
Then bites impatient at the bounding stone; 
Extends her jaws, as she her voice would raise 
To keen invectives in her wonted phrase; 
But barks, and thence the yelping brute betrays. 
Still a sad monument the place remains, 
And from this monstrous change its name obtains: 
Where she, in long remembrance of her ills, 
With plaintive howlings the wide desart fills. 

Greeks, Trojans, friends, and foes, and Gods above 
Her num'rous wrongs to just compassion move. 
Ev'n Juno's self forgets her ancient hate, 
And owns, she had deserv'd a milder fate. 

Yet bright Aurora, partial as she was 
To Troy, and those that lov'd the Trojan cause, 
Nor Troy, nor Hecuba can now bemoan, 
But weeps a sad misfortune, more her own. 
Her offspring Memnon, by Achilles slain, 
She saw extended on the Phrygian plain: 
She saw, and strait the purple beams, that grace 
The rosie morning, vanish'd from her face; 
A deadly pale her wonted bloom invades, 
And veils the lowring skies with mournful shades. 
But when his limbs upon the pile were laid, 
The last kind duty that by friends is paid, 
His mother to the skies directs her flight, 
Nor cou'd sustain to view the doleful sight: 
But frantick, with her loose neglected hair, 
Hastens to Jove, and falls a suppliant there. 
O king of Heav'n, o father of the skies, 
The weeping Goddess passionately cries, 
Tho' I the meanest of immortals am, 
And fewest temples celebrate my fame, 
Yet still a Goddess, I presume to come 
Within the verge of your etherial dome: 
Yet still may plead some merit, if my light 
With purple dawn controuls the Pow'rs of night; 
If from a female hand that virtue springs, 
Which to the Gods, and men such pleasure brings. 
Yet I nor honours seek, nor rites divine, 
Nor for more altars, or more fanes repine; 
Oh! that such trifles were the only cause, 
From whence Aurora's mind its anguish draws! 
For Memnon lost, my dearest only child, 
With weightier grief my heavy heart is fill'd; 
My warrior son! that liv'd but half his time, 
Nipt in the bud, and blasted in his prime; 
Who for his uncle early took the field, 
And by Achilles' fatal spear was kill'd. 
To whom but Jove shou'd I for succour come? 
For Jove alone cou'd fix his cruel doom. 
O sov'reign of the Gods accept my pray'r, 
Grant my request, and sooth a mother's care; 
On the deceas'd some solemn boon bestow, 
To expiate the loss, and ease my woe. 

Jove, with a nod, comply'd with her desire; 
Around the body flam'd the fun'ral fire; 
The pile decreas'd, that lately seem'd so high, 
And sheets of smoak roll'd upward to the sky: 
As humid vapours from a marshy bog, 
Rise by degrees, condensing into fog, 
That intercept the sun's enliv'ning ray, 
And with a cloud infect the chearful day. 
The sooty ashes wafted by the air, 
Whirl round, and thicken in a body there; 
Then take a form, which their own heat, and fire 
With active life, and energy inspire. 
Its lightness makes it seem to fly, and soon 
It skims on real wings, that are its own; 
A real bird, it beats the breezy wind, 
Mix'd with a thousand sisters of the kind, 
That, from the same formation newly sprung, 
Up-born aloft on plumy pinions hung. 
Thrice round the pile advanc'd the circling throng. 
Thrice, with their wings, a whizzing consort rung. 
In the fourth flight their squadron they divide, 
Rank'd in two diff'rent troops, on either side: 
Then two, and two, inspir'd with martial rage, 
From either troop in equal pairs engage. 
Each combatant with beak, and pounces press'd, 
In wrathful ire, his adversary's breast; 
Each falls a victim, to preserve the fame 
Of that great hero, whence their being came. 
From him their courage, and their name they take, 
And, as they liv'd, they dye for Memnon's sake. 
Punctual to time, with each revolving year, 
In fresh array the champion birds appear; 
Again, prepar'd with vengeful minds, they come 
To bleed, in honour of the souldier's tomb. 

Therefore in others it appear'd not strange, 
To grieve for Hecuba's unhappy change: 
But poor Aurora had enough to do 
With her own loss, to mind another's woe; 
Who still in tears, her tender nature shews, 
Besprinkling all the world with pearly dews. 

Troy thus destroy'd, 'twas still deny'd by Fate, 
The hopes of Troy should perish with the state. 
His sire, the son of Cytherea bore, 
And household-Gods from burning Ilium's shore, 
The pious prince (a double duty paid) 
Each sacred burthen thro' the flames convey'd. 
With young Ascanius, and this only prize, 
Of heaps of wealth, he from Antandros flies; 
But struck with horror, left the Thracian shore, 
Stain'd with the blood of murder'd Polydore. 
The Delian isle receives the banish'd train, 
Driv'n by kind gales, and favour'd by the main. 

Here pious Anius, priest, and monarch reign'd, 
And either charge, with equal care sustain'd, 
His subjects rul'd, to Phoebus homage pay'd, 
His God obeying, and by those obey'd. 

The priest displays his hospitable gate, 
And shows the riches of his church, and state 
The sacred shrubs, which eas'd Latona's pain, 
The palm, and olive, and the votive fane. 
Here grateful flames with fuming incense fed, 
And mingled wine, ambrosial odours shed; 
Of slaughter'd steers the crackling entrails burn'd: 
And then the strangers to the court return'd. 

On beds of tap'stry plac'd aloft, they dine 
With Ceres' gift, and flowing bowls of wine; 
When thus Anchises spoke, amidst the feast: 
Say, mitred monarch, Phoebus' chosen priest, 
Or (e'er from Troy by cruel Fate expell'd) 
When first mine eyes these sacred walls beheld, 
A son, and twice two daughters crown'd thy bliss? 
Or errs my mem'ry, and I judge amiss? 

The royal prophet shook his hoary head, 
With snowy fillets bound, and sighing, said: 
Thy mem'ry errs not, prince; thou saw'st me then, 
The happy father of so large a train; 
Behold me now (such turns of chance befall 
The race of man!), almost bereft of all. 
For (ah!) what comfort can my son bestow, 
What help afford, to mitigate my woe! 
While far from hence, in Andros' isle he reigns, 
(From him so nam'd) and there my place sustains. 
Him Delius praescience gave; the twice-born God 
A boon more wond'rous on the maids bestow'd. 
Whate'er they touch'd, he gave them to transmute 
(A gift past credit, and above their suit) 
To Ceres, Bacchus, and Minerva's fruit. 
How great their value, and how rich their use, 
Whose only touch such treasures could produce! 

The dire destroyer of the Trojan reign, 
Fierce Agamemnon, such a prize to gain 
(A proof we also were design'd by Fate 
To feel the tempest, that o'erturn'd your state), 
With force superior, and a ruffian crew, 
From these weak arms, the helpless virgins drew: 
And sternly bad them use the grant divine, 
To keep the fleet in corn, and oil, and wine. 
Each, as they could, escap'd: two strove to gain 
Euboea's isle, and two their brother's reign. 
The soldier follows, and demands the dames; 
If held by force, immediate war proclaims. 
Fear conquer'd Nature in their brother's mind, 
And gave them up to punishment assign'd. 
Forgive the deed; nor Hector's arm was there, 
Nor thine, Aeneas, to maintain the war; 
Whose only force upheld your Ilium's tow'rs, 
For ten long years, against the Grecian pow'rs. 
Prepar'd to bind their captive arms in bands, 
To Heav'n they rear'd their yet unfetter'd hands, 
Help, Bacchus, author of the gift, they pray'd; 
The gift's great author gave immediate aid; 
If such destruction of their human frame 
By ways so wond'rous, may deserve the name; 
Nor could I hear, nor can I now relate 
Exact, the manner of their alter'd state; 
But this in gen'ral of my loss I knew, 
Transform'd to doves, on milky plumes they flew, 
Such as on Ida's mount thy consort's chariot drew. 

With such discourse, they entertain'd the feast; 
Then rose from table, and withdrew to rest. 
The following morn, ere Sol was seen to shine, 
Th' inquiring Trojans sought the sacred shrine; 
The mystick Pow'r commands them to explore 
Their ancient mother, and a kindred shore. 
Attending to the sea, the gen'rous prince 
Dismiss'd his guests with rich munificence, 
In old Anchises' hand a sceptre plac'd, 
A vest, and quiver young Ascanius grac'd, 
His sire, a cup; which from th' Aonian coast, 
Ismenian Therses sent his royal host. 
Alcon of Myle made what Therses sent, 
And carv'd thereon this ample argument. 

A town with sev'n distinguish'd gates was shown, 
Which spoke its name, and made the city known; 
Before it, piles, and tombs, and rising flames, 
The rites of death, and quires of mourning dames, 
Who bar'd their breasts, and gave their hair to flow, 
The signs of grief, and marks of publick woe. 
Their fountains dry'd, the weeping Naiads mourn'd, 
The trees stood bare, with searing cankers burn'd, 
No herbage cloath'd the ground, a ragged flock 
Of goats half-famish'd, lick'd the naked rock, 
Of manly courage, and with mind serene, 
Orion's daughters in the town were seen; 
One heav'd her chest to meet the lifted knife, 
One plung'd the poyniard thro' the seat of life, 
Their country's victims; mourns the rescu'd state, 
The bodies burns, and celebrates their Fate. 
To save the failure of th' illustrious line, 
From the pale ashes rose, of form divine, 
Two gen'rous youths; these, fame Coronae calls, 
Who join the pomp, and mourn their mother's falls. 

These burnish'd figures form'd of antique mold, 
Shone on the brass, with rising sculpture bold; 
A wreath of gilt Acanthus round the brim was roll'd. 

Nor less expence the Trojan gifts express'd; 
A fuming censer for the royal priest, 
A chalice, and a crown of princely cost, 
With ruddy gold, and sparkling gems emboss'd. 

Now hoisting sail, to Crete the Trojans stood, 
Themselves remembring sprung from Teucer's blood; 
But Heav'n forbids, and pestilential Jove 
From noxious skies, the wand'ring navy drove. 
Her hundred cities left, from Crete they bore, 
And sought the destin'd land, Ausonia's shore; 
But toss'd by storms at either Strophas lay, 
'Till scar'd by Harpies from the faithless bay. 
Then passing onward with a prosp'rous wind, 
Left sly Ulysses' spacious realms behind; 
Ambracia's state, in former ages known. 
The strife of Gods, the judge transform'd to stone 
They saw; for Actian Phoebus since renown'd, 
Who Caesar's arms with naval conquest crown'd; 
Next pass'd Dodona, wont of old to boast 
Her vocal forest; and Chaonia's coast, 
Where king Molossus' sons on wings aspir'd, 
And saw secure the harmless fewel fir'd. 

Now to Phaeacia's happy isle they came, 
For fertile orchards known to early fame; 
Epirus past, they next beheld with joy 
A second Ilium, and fictitious Troy; 
Here Trojan Helenus the sceptre sway'd, 
Who show'd their fate and mystick truths display'd. 
By him confirm'd Sicilia's isle they reach'd, 
Whose sides to sea three promontories stretch'd, 
Pachynos to the stormy south is plac'd, 
On Lilybaeum blows the gentle west, 
Peloro's cliffs the northern bear survey, 
Who rolls above, and dreads to touch the sea. 
By this they steer, and favour'd by the tide, 
Secure by night in Zancle's harbour ride. 

Here cruel Scylla guards the rocky shore, 
And there the waves of loud Charybdis roar: 
This sucks, and vomits ships, and bodies drown'd; 
And rav'nous dogs the womb of that surround, 
In face a virgin; and (if ought be true 
By bards recorded) once a virgin too. 

A train of youths in vain desir'd her bed; 
By sea-nymphs lov'd, to nymphs of seas she fled; 
The maid to these, with female pride, display'd 
Their baffled courtship, and their love betray'd. 

When Galatea thus bespoke the fair 
(But first she sigh'd), while Scylla comb'd her hair: 
You, lovely maid, a gen'rous race pursues, 
Whom safe you may (as now you do) refuse; 
To me, tho' pow'rful in a num'rous train 
Of sisters, sprung from Gods, who rule the main, 
My native seas could scarce a refuge prove, 
To shun the fury of the Cyclops' love, 

Tears choak'd her utt'rance here; the pity'ng maid 
With marble fingers wip'd them off, and said: 

My dearest Goddess, let thy Scylla know, 
(For I am faithful) whence these sorrows flow. 

The maid's intreaties o'er the nymph prevail, 
Who thus to Scylla tells the mournful tale. 

Acis, the lovely youth, whose loss I mourn, 
From Faunus, and the nymph Symethis born, 
Was both his parents' pleasure; but, to me 
Was all that love could make a lover be. 
The Gods our minds in mutual bands did join: 
I was his only joy, and he was mine. 
Now sixteen summers the sweet youth had seen; 
And doubtful down began to shade his chin: 
When Polyphemus first disturb'd our joy; 
And lov'd me fiercely, as I lov'd the boy. 
Ask not which passion in my soul was high'r, 
My last aversion, or my first desire: 
Nor this the greater was, nor that the less; 
Both were alike, for both were in excess. 
Thee, Venus, thee both Heav'n, and Earth obey; 
Immense thy pow'r, and boundless is thy sway. 
The Cyclops, who defy'd th' aetherial throne, 
And thought no thunder louder than his own, 
The terror of the woods, and wilder far 
Than wolves in plains, or bears in forests are, 
Th' inhuman host, who made his bloody feasts 
On mangl'd members of his butcher'd guests, 
Yet felt the force of love, and fierce desire, 
And burnt for me, with unrelenting fire. 
Forgot his caverns, and his woolly care, 
Assum'd the softness of a lover's air; 
And comb'd, with teeth of rakes, his rugged hair. 
Now with a crooked scythe his beard he sleeks; 
And mows the stubborn stubble of his cheeks: 
Now in the crystal stream he looks, to try 
His simagres, and rowls his glaring eye. 
His cruelty, and thirst of blood are lost; 
And ships securely sail along the coast. 

The prophet Telemus (arriv'd by chance 
Where Aetna's summets to the seas advance, 
Who mark'd the tracts of every bird that flew, 
And sure presages from their flying drew) 
Foretold the Cyclops, that Ulysses' hand 
In his broad eye shou'd thrust a flaming brand. 
The giant, with a scornful grin, reply'd, 
Vain augur, thou hast falsely prophesy'd; 
Already love his flaming brand has tost; 
Looking on two fair eyes, my sight I lost, 
Thus, warn'd in vain, with stalking pace he strode, 
And stamp'd the margin of the briny flood 
With heavy steps; and weary, sought agen 
The cool retirement of his gloomy den. 

A promontory, sharp'ning by degrees, 
Ends in a wedge, and overlooks the seas: 
On either side, below, the water flows; 
This airy walk the giant lover chose. 
Here on the midst he sate; his flocks, unled, 
Their shepherd follow'd, and securely fed. 
A pine so burly, and of length so vast, 
That sailing ships requir'd it for a mast, 
He wielded for a staff, his steps to guide: 
But laid it by, his whistle while he try'd. 
A hundred reeds of a prodigious growth, 
Scarce made a pipe, proportion'd to his mouth: 
Which when he gave it wind, the rocks around, 
And watry plains, the dreadful hiss resound. 
I heard the ruffian-shepherd rudely blow, 
Where, in a hollow cave, I sat below; 
On Acis' bosom I my head reclin'd: 
And still preserve the poem in my mind. 

Oh lovely Galatea, whiter far 
Than falling snows, and rising lillies are; 
More flowry than the meads, as chrystal bright: 
Erect as alders, and of equal height: 
More wanton than a kid, more sleek thy skin, 
Than orient shells, that on the shores are seen, 
Than apples fairer, when the boughs they lade; 
Pleasing, as winter suns, or summer shade: 
More grateful to the sight, than goodly plains; 
And softer to the touch, than down of swans; 
Or curds new turn'd; and sweeter to the taste 
Than swelling grapes, that to the vintage haste: 
More clear than ice, or running streams, that stray 
Through garden plots, but ah! more swift than they. 

Yet, Galatea, harder to be broke 
Than bullocks, unreclaim'd, to bear the yoke, 
And far more stubborn, than the knotted oak: 
Like sliding streams, impossible to hold; 
Like them, fallacious, like their fountains, cold. 
More warping, than the willow, to decline 
My warm embrace, more brittle, than the vine; 
Immovable, and fixt in thy disdain: 
Tough, as these rocks, and of a harder grain. 
More violent, than is the rising flood; 
And the prais'd peacock is not half so proud. 
Fierce, as the fire, and sharp, as thistles are, 
And more outragious, than a mother-bear: 
Deaf, as the billows to the vows I make; 
And more revengeful, than a trodden snake. 
In swiftness fleeter, than the flying hind, 
Or driven tempests, or the driving wind. 
All other faults, with patience I can bear; 
But swiftness is the vice I only fear. 

Yet if you knew me well, you wou'd not shun 
My love, but to my wish'd embraces run: 
Wou'd languish in your turn, and court my stay; 
And much repent of your unwise delay. 

My palace, in the living rock, is made 
By Nature's hand; a spacious pleasing shade: 
Which neither heat can pierce, nor cold invade. 
My garden fill'd with fruits you may behold, 
And grapes in clusters, imitating gold; 
Some blushing bunches of a purple hue: 
And these, and those, are all reserv'd for you. 
Red strawberries, in shades, expecting stand, 
Proud to be gather'd by so white a hand. 
Autumnal cornels latter fruit provide; 
And plumbs, to tempt you, turn their glossy side: 
Not those of common kinds; but such alone, 
As in Phaeacian orchards might have grown: 
Nor chestnuts shall be wanting to your food, 
Nor garden-fruits, nor wildings of the wood; 
The laden boughs for you alone shall bear; 
And yours shall be the product of the year. 

The flocks you see, are all my own; beside 
The rest that woods, and winding vallies hide; 
And those that folded in the caves abide. 
Ask not the numbers of my growing store; 
Who knows how many, knows he has no more. 
Nor will I praise my cattle; trust not me, 
But judge your self, and pass your own decree: 
Behold their swelling dugs; the sweepy weight 
Of ewes, that sink beneath the milky freight; 
In the warm folds their tender lambkins lye; 
Apart from kids, that call with human cry. 
New milk in nut-brown bowls is duely serv'd 
For daily drink; the rest for cheese reserv'd. 
Nor are these household dainties all my store: 
The fields, and forests will afford us more; 
The deer, the hare, the goat, the savage boar. 
All sorts of ven'son; and of birds the best; 
A pair of turtles taken from the nest. 
I walk'd the mountains, and two cubs I found 
(Whose dam had left 'em on the naked ground), 
So like, that no distinction could be seen: 
So pretty, they were presents for a queen; 
And so they shall; I took them both away; 
And keep, to be companions of your play. 

Oh raise, fair nymph, your beauteous face above 
The waves; nor scorn my presents, and my love. 
Come, Galatea, come, and view my face; 
I late beheld it, in the watry glass; 
And found it lovelier, than I fear'd it was. 
Survey my towring stature, and my size: 
Not Jove, the Jove you dream, that rules the skies, 
Bears such a bulk, or is so largely spread: 
My locks (the plenteous harvest of my head) 
Hang o'er my manly face; and dangling down, 
As with a shady grove, my shoulders crown. 
Nor think, because my limbs and body bear 
A thick-set underwood of bristling hair, 
My shape deform'd; what fouler sight can be, 
Than the bald branches of a leafless tree? 
Foul is the steed without a flowing mane: 
And birds, without their feathers, and their train. 
Wool decks the sheep; and Man receives a grace 
From bushy limbs, and from a bearded face. 
My forehead with a single eye is fill'd, 
Round, as a ball, and ample, as a shield. 
The glorious lamp of Heav'n, the radiant sun, 
Is Nature's eye; and she's content with one. 
Add, that my father sways your seas, and I, 
Like you, am of the watry family. 
I make you his, in making you my own; 
You I adore; and kneel to you alone: 
Jove, with his fabled thunder, I despise, 
And only fear the lightning of your eyes. 
Frown not, fair nymph; yet I cou'd bear to be 
Disdain'd, if others were disdain'd with me. 
But to repulse the Cyclops, and prefer 
The love of Acis (Heav'ns!) I cannot bear. 
But let the stripling please himself; nay more, 
Please you, tho' that's the thing I most abhor; 
The boy shall find, if e'er we cope in fight, 
These giant limbs, endu'd with giant might. 
His living bowels from his belly torn, 
And scatter'd limbs shall on the flood be born: 
Thy flood, ungrateful nymph; and fate shall find, 
That way for thee, and Acis to be join'd. 
For oh! I burn with love, and thy disdain 
Augments at once my passion, and my pain. 
Translated Aetna flames within my heart, 
And thou, inhuman, wilt not ease my smart. 

Lamenting thus in vain, he rose, and strode 
With furious paces to the neighb'ring wood: 
Restless his feet, distracted was his walk; 
Mad were his motions, and confus'd his talk. 
Mad, as the vanquish'd bull, when forc'd to yield 
His lovely mistress, and forsake the field. 

Thus far unseen I saw: when fatal chance, 
His looks directing, with a sudden glance, 
Acis and I were to his sight betray'd; 
Where, nought suspecting, we securely play'd. 
From his wide mouth a bellowing cry he cast, 
I see, I see; but this shall be your last: 
A roar so loud made Aetna to rebound: 
And all the Cyclops labour'd in the sound. 
Affrighted with his monstrous voice, I fled, 
And in the neighbouring ocean plung'd my head. 
Poor Acis turn'd his back, and Help, he cry'd, 
Help, Galatea, help, my parent Gods, 
And take me dying to your deep abodes. 
The Cyclops follow'd; but he sent before 
A rib, which from the living rock he tore: 
Though but an angle reach'd him of the stone, 
The mighty fragment was enough alone, 
To crush all Acis; 'twas too late to save, 
But what the Fates allow'd to give, I gave: 
That Acis to his lineage should return; 
And rowl, among the river Gods, his urn. 
Straight issu'd from the stone a stream of blood; 
Which lost the purple, mingling with the flood, 
Then, like a troubled torrent, it appear'd: 
The torrent too, in little space, was clear'd. 
The stone was cleft, and through the yawning chink 
New reeds arose, on the new river's brink. 
The rock, from out its hollow womb, disclos'd 
A sound like water in its course oppos'd, 
When (wond'rous to behold), full in the flood, 
Up starts a youth, and navel high he stood. 
Horns from his temples rise; and either horn 
Thick wreaths of reeds (his native growth) adorn. 
Were not his stature taller than before, 
His bulk augmented, and his beauty more, 
His colour blue; for Acis he might pass: 
And Acis chang'd into a stream he was, 
But mine no more; he rowls along the plains 
With rapid motion, and his name retains. 

Here ceas'd the nymph; the fair assembly broke, 
The sea-green Nereids to the waves betook: 
While Scylla, fearful of the wide-spread main, 
Swift to the safer shore returns again. 
There o'er the sandy margin, unarray'd, 
With printless footsteps flies the bounding maid; 
Or in some winding creek's secure retreat 
She baths her weary limbs, and shuns the noonday's heat.

Her Glaucus saw, as o'er the deep he rode, 
New to the seas, and late receiv'd a God. 
He saw, and languish'd for the virgin's love; 
With many an artful blandishment he strove 
Her flight to hinder, and her fears remove. 
The more he sues, the more she wings her flight, 
And nimbly gains a neighb'ring mountain's height. 
Steep shelving to the margin of the flood, 
A neighb'ring mountain bare, and woodless stood; 
Here, by the place secur'd, her steps she stay'd, 
And, trembling still, her lover's form survey'd. 
His shape, his hue, her troubled sense appall, 
And dropping locks that o'er his shoulders fall; 
She sees his face divine, and manly brow, 
End in a fish's wreathy tail below: 
She sees, and doubts within her anxious mind, 
Whether he comes of God, or monster kind. 
This Glaucus soon perceiv'd; and, Oh! forbear 
(His hand supporting on a rock lay near), 
Forbear, he cry'd, fond maid, this needless fear. 
Nor fish am I, nor monster of the main, 
But equal with the watry Gods I reign; 
Nor Proteus, nor Palaemon me excell, 
Nor he whose breath inspires the sounding shell. 
My birth, 'tis true, I owe to mortal race, 
And I my self but late a mortal was: 
Ev'n then in seas, and seas alone, I joy'd; 
The seas my hours, and all my cares employ'd, 
In meshes now the twinkling prey I drew; 
Now skilfully the slender line I threw, 
And silent sat the moving float to view. 
Not far from shore, there lies a verdant mead, 
With herbage half, and half with water spread: 
There, nor the horned heifers browsing stray, 
Nor shaggy kids, nor wanton lambkins play; 
There, nor the sounding bees their nectar cull, 
Nor rural swains their genial chaplets pull, 
Nor flocks, nor herds, nor mowers haunt the place, 
To crop the flow'rs, or cut the bushy grass: 
Thither, sure first of living race came I, 
And sat by chance, my dropping nets to dry. 
My scaly prize, in order all display'd, 
By number on the greensward there I lay'd, 
My captives, whom or in my nets I took, 
Or hung unwary on my wily hook. 
Strange to behold! yet what avails a lye? 
I saw 'em bite the grass, as I sate by; 
Then sudden darting o'er the verdant plain, 
They spread their finns, as in their native main: 
I paus'd, with wonder struck, while all my prey 
Left their new master, and regain'd the sea. 
Amaz'd, within my secret self I sought, 
What God, what herb the miracle had wrought: 
But sure no herbs have pow'r like this, I cry'd; 
And strait I pluck'd some neighb'ring herbs, and try'd. 
Scarce had I bit, and prov'd the wond'rous taste, 
When strong convulsions shook my troubled breast; 
I felt my heart grow fond of something strange, 
And my whole Nature lab'ring with a change. 
Restless I grew, and ev'ry place forsook, 
And still upon the seas I bent my look. 
Farewel for ever! farewel, land! I said; 
And plung'd amidst the waves my sinking head. 
The gentle Pow'rs, who that low empire keep, 
Receiv'd me as a brother of the deep; 
To Tethys, and to Ocean old, they pray 
To purge my mortal earthy parts away. 
The watry parents to their suit agreed, 
And thrice nine times a secret charm they read, 
Then with lustrations purify my limbs, 
And bid me bathe beneath a hundred streams: 
A hundred streams from various fountains run, 
And on my head at once come rushing down. 
Thus far each passage I remember well, 
And faithfully thus far the tale I tell; 
But then oblivion dark, on all my senses fell. 
Again at length my thought reviving came, 
When I no longer found my self the same; 
Then first this sea-green beard I felt to grow, 
And these large honours on my spreading brow; 
My long-descending locks the billows sweep, 
And my broad shoulders cleave the yielding deep; 
My fishy tail, my arms of azure hue, 
And ev'ry part divinely chang'd, I view. 
But what avail these useless honours now? 
What joys can immortality bestow? 
What, tho' our Nereids all my form approve? 
What boots it, while fair Scylla scorns my love? 

Thus far the God; and more he wou'd have said; 
When from his presence flew the ruthless maid. 
Stung with repulse, in such disdainful sort, 
He seeks Titanian Circe's horrid court.

Now Glaucus, with a lover's haste, bounds o'er 
The swelling waves, and seeks the Latian shore. 
Messena, Rhegium, and the barren coast 
Of flaming Aetna, to his sight are lost: 
At length he gains the Tyrrhene seas, and views 
The hills where baneful philters Circe brews; 
Monsters, in various forms, around her press; 
As thus the God salutes the sorceress. 
O Circe, be indulgent to my grief, 
And give a love-sick deity relief. 
Too well the mighty pow'r of plants I know, 
To those my figure, and new Fate I owe. 
Against Messena, on th' Ausonian coast, 
I Scylla view'd, and from that hour was lost. 
In tend'rest sounds I su'd; but still the fair 
Was deaf to vows, and pityless to pray'r. 
If numbers can avail, exert their pow'r; 
Or energy of plants, if plants have more. 
I ask no cure; let but the virgin pine 
With dying pangs, or agonies, like mine. 

No longer Circe could her flame disguise, 
But to the suppliant God marine, replies: 

When maids are coy, have manlier aims in view; 
Leave those that fly, but those that like, pursue. 
If love can be by kind compliance won; 
See, at your feet, the daughter of the Sun. 

Sooner, said Glaucus, shall the ash remove 
From mountains, and the swelling surges love; 
Or humble sea-weed to the hills repair; 
E'er I think any but my Scylla fair. 

Strait Circe reddens with a guilty shame, 
And vows revenge for her rejected flame. 
Fierce liking oft a spight as fierce creates; 
For love refus'd, without aversion, hates. 
To hurt her hapless rival she proceeds; 
And, by the fall of Scylla, Glaucus bleeds. 

Some fascinating bev'rage now she brews; 
Compos'd of deadly drugs, and baneful juice. 
At Rhegium she arrives; the ocean braves, 
And treads with unwet feet the boiling waves. 
Upon the beach a winding bay there lies, 
Shelter'd from seas, and shaded from the skies: 
This station Scylla chose: a soft retreat 
From chilling winds, and raging Cancer's heat. 
The vengeful sorc'ress visits this recess; 
Her charm infuses, and infects the place. 
Soon as the nymph wades in, her nether parts 
Turn into dogs; then at her self she starts. 
A ghastly horror in her eyes appears; 
But yet she knows not, who it is she fears; 
In vain she offers from her self to run, 
And drags about her what she strives to shun.

**
Satires (Juvenal)
***

STILL shall I hear, and never quit the Score, 
Stund with hoarse Codrus Theseid, ore and ore? 
Shall this mans Elegies and tother Play  
Unpunishd Murther a long Summers day? 
Huge Telephus, a formidable page,
Cries Vengeance; and Orestess bulky rage,  
Unsatisfyd with Margins closely writ,  
Foams ore the Covers, and not finishd yet.  
No Man can take a more familiar note  
Of his own Home, than I of Vulcans Grott,
Or Mars his Grove, or hollow winds that blow  
From tnas top, or torturd Ghosts below.  
I know by rote the Famd Exploits of Greece;  
The Centaurs fury, and the Golden Fleece; 
Through the thick shades th Eternal Scribler bauls;
And shakes the Statues on their Pedestals.  
The best and worst on the same Theme employs  
His Muse, and plagues us with an equal noise. 
Provokd by these Incorrigible Fools, 
I left declaiming in pedantick Schools;
Where, with Men-boys, I strove to get Renown, 
Advising Sylla to a private Gown. 
But, since the World with Writing is possest, 
Ill versifie in spite; and do my best  
To make as much waste Paper as the rest.
But why I lift aloft the Satyrs Rod,  
And tread the Path which famd Lucilius trod, 
Attend the Causes which my Muse have led: 
When Sapless Eunuchs mount the Marriage-bed,  
When Mannish Mevia, that two-handed Whore,
Astride on Horse-back hunts the Tuscan Boar;  
When all our Lords are by his Wealth outvyd, 
Whose Razour on my callow-beard was tryd; 
When I behold the Spawn of conquerd Nile 
Crispinus both in Birth and Manners vile,
Pacing in pomp, with Cloak of Tyrian dye, 
Changd oft a day for needless Luxury;  
And finding oft occasion to be fand, 
Ambitious to produce his Lady-hand; 
Chargd with light Summer-rings his fingers sweat,
Unable to support a Gem of weight:  
Such fulsom Objects meeting every where,  
Tis hard to write, but harder to forbear.  
To view so lewd a Town, and to refrain, 
What Hoops of Iron coud my Spleen contain!
When pleading Matho, born abroad for Air,  
With his Fat Paunch fills his new fashiond Chair,  
And after him the Wretch in Pomp conveyd,  
Whose Evidence his Lord and Friend betrayd,  
And but the wishd Occasion does attend
From the poor Nobles the last Spoils to rend, 
Whom evn Spies dread as their Superiour Fiend, 
And bribe with Presents, or, when Presents fail,  
They send their prostituted Wives for bail: 
When Night-performance holds the place of Merit,
And Brawn and Back the next of Kin disherit;  
For such good Parts are in Preferments way,  
The Rich Old Madam never fails to pay; 
Her Legacies by Natures Standard givn,  
One gains an Ounce, another gains Eleven:
A dear-bought Bargain, all things duly weighd, 
For which their thrice Concocted Blood is paid. 
With looks as wan, as he who in the Brake 
At unawares has trod upon a Snake;  
Or playd at Lions a declaiming Prize,
For which the Vanquishd Rhetorician Dyes.  
What Indignation boils within my Veins, 
When perjurd Guardians, proud with Impious Gains,  
Choak up the Streets, too narrow for their Trains!  
Whose Wards by want betrayd, to Crimes are led
Too foul to Name, too fulsom to be read!  
When he who pilld his Province scapes the Laws,  
And keeps his Money though he lost his Cause: 
His Fine beggd off, contemns his Infamy, 
Can rise at twelve, and get him Drunk ere three:
Enjoys his Exile, and, Condemnd in vain, 
Leaves thee, prevailing Province, to complain! 
Such Villanies rousd Horace into Wrath  
And tis more Noble to pursue his Path, 
Than an Old Tale of Diomede to repeat,
Or labring after Hercules to sweat,  
Or wandring in the winding Maze of Creet; 
Or with the winged Smith aloft to fly,  
Or fluttring Perish with his foolish Boy.  
With what Impatience must the Muse behold
The Wife by her procuring Husband sold? 
For though the Law makes Null th Adulterers Deed  
Of Lands to her, the Cuckold may succeed; 
Who his taught Eyes up to the Cieling throws, 
And sleeps all over but his wakeful Nose.
When he dares hope a Colonels Command, 
Whose Coursers kept, ran out his Fathers Land; 
Who yet a Stripling Neros Chariot drove, 
Whirld ore the Streets, while his vain Master strove  
With boasted Art to please his Eunuch-Love.
Woud it not make a modest Author dare  
To draw his Table-Book within the Square, 
And fill with Notes, when lolling at his ease,  
Mecenas-like, the happy Rogue he sees  
Born by Six wearyd Slaves in open View,
Who Cancelld an old Will, and forgd a New;  
Made wealthy at the small expence of Signing  
With a wet Seal, and a fresh Interlining? 
The Lady, next, requires a lashing Line,  
Who squeezd a Toad into her Husbands Wine:
So well the fashionable Medcine thrives, 
That now tis Practisd evn by Country Wives:  
Poysning without regard of Fame or Fear: 
And spotted Corps are frequent on the Bier. 
Woudst thou to Honours and Preferments climb,
Be bold in Mischief, dare some mighty Crime,  
Which Dungeons, Death, or Banishment deserves:  
For Virtue is but dryly Praisd, and Sterves. 
Great Men, to great Crimes, owe their Plate Embost, 
Fair Palaces, and Furniture of Cost;
And high Commands: A Sneaking Sin is lost.  
Who can behold that rank Old Letcher keep 
His Sons Corrupted Wife, and hope to sleep? 
Or that Male-Harlot, or that unfledgd Boy, 
Eager to Sin, before he can enjoy?
If Nature coud not, Anger would indite 
Such woeful stuff as I or Sll write.  
Count from the time, since Old Deucalions Boat, 
Raisd by the Flood, did on Parnassus Float;  
And scarcely Mooring on the Cliff, implord
An Oracle how Man might be restord;  
When softend Stones and Vital Breath ensud, 
And Virgins Naked were by Lovers Viewd;  
What ever since that Golden Age was done, 
What Humane Kind desires, and what they shun,
Rage, Passions, Pleasures, Impotence of Will, 
Shall this Satyrical Collection fill. 
What Age so large a Crop of Vices bore, 
Or when was Avarice extended more?  
When were the Dice with more Porfusion thrown?
The well filld Fob not emptyd now alone,  
But Gamesters for whole Patrimonies play; 
The Steward brings the Deeds which must convey  
The lost Estate: What more than Madness reigns, 
When one short sitting many Hundreds Drains,
And not enough is left him to supply  
Board-Wages, or a Footmans Livery? 
What Age so many Summer-Seats did see?  
Or which of our Forefathers fard so well 
As on seven Dishes, at a private Meal?
Clients of Old were Feasted; now a poor 
Divided Dole is dealt a th outward Door  
Which by the Hungry Rout is soon dispatchd 
The Paltry Largess, too, severely watchd 
Ere given; and evry Face observd with Care,
That no intruding Guest Usurp a share.  
Known, you Receive: The Cryer calls aloud 
Our Old Nobility of Trojan Blood, 
Who gape among the Croud for their precarious Food. 
The Prtors, and the Tribunes Voice is heard;
The Freedman justles and will be preferrd; 
First come, first servd he Cries; and I, in spight 
Of your Great Lordships, will Maintain my Right.  
Tho born a Slave tho my torn Ears are bord, 
Tis not the Birth, tis Mony makes the Lord.
The Rents of Five fair Houses I received  
What greater Honours can the Purple give  
The Poor Patrician is reducd to keep  
In Melancholly Walks a Graziers Sheep; 
Not Pallas nor Licinius had my Treasure;
Then let the Sacred Tribunes wait my leasure. 
Once a Poor Rogue, tis true, I trod the Street.  
And trudgd to Rome upon my Naked Feet  
Gold is the greatest God; though yet we see 
No Temples raisd to Monys Majesty,
No Altars fuming to her Powr Divine. 
Such as to Valour, Peace, and Virtue Shine  
And Faith, and Concord: where the Stork on high  
Seems to Salute her Infant Progeny, 
Presaging Pious Love with her Auspicious Cry,
But since our Knights and Senate account  
To what their sordid begging Vails amount,  
Judge what a wretched share the Poor attends, 
Whose whole Subsistence on those Alms depends!  
Their Household-Fire, their Rayment, and their Food,
Prevented by those Harpies; when a wood  
Of Litters thick besiege the Donors Gate,  
And begging Lords, and teeming Ladies wait  
The promisd Dole: Nay some have learnd the trick  
To beg for absent persons; feign them sick,
Close mewd in their Sedans, for fear of air: 
And for their Wives produce an empty Chair. 
This is my Spouse: Dispatch her with her share. 
Tis Galla: Let her Ladyship but peep: 
No, Sir, tis pity to disturb her sleep.
Such fine Employments our whole days divide:  
The Salutations of the Morning-tide 
Call up the Sun; those ended, to the Hall 
We wait the Patron, hear the Lawyers baul;  
Then to the Statues; where amidst the Race
Of Conquring Rome, some Arab shews his Face  
Inscribd with Titles, and profanes the place;  
Fit to be pissd against, and somewhat more.  
The Great Man, home conducted, shuts his door;  
Old Clients, wearyd out with fruitless care,
Dismiss their hopes of eating, and despair: 
Though much against the grain, forcd to retire,  
Buy Roots for Supper, and provide a Fire. 
Mean time his Lordship lolls within at ease,  
Pampring his Paunch with Foreign Rarities;
Both Sea and Land are ransackd for the Feast;  
And his own Gut the sole invited Guest. 
Such Plate, such Tables, Dishes dressd so well,  
That whole Estates are swallowd at a Meal. 
Evn Parasites are banishd from his Board:
(At once a sordid and luxurious Lord:)  
Prodigious Throat, for which whole Boars are drest; 
(A Creature formd to furnish out a Feast.) 
But present Punishment pursues his Maw, 
When surfeited and swelld, the Peacock raw
He bears into the Bath; whence want of Breath,  
Repletions, Apoplex, intestate Death. 
His Fate makes Table-talk, divulgd with scorn, 
And he, a Jeast, into his Grave is born.  
No Age can go beyond us: Future Times
Can add no farther to the present Crimes. 
Our Sons but the same things can wish and do; 
Vice is at stand, and at the highest flow.  
Then Satyr spread thy Sails; take all the winds can blow. 
Some may, perhaps, demand what Muse can yield
Sufficient strength for such a spacious Field?  
From whence can be derivd so large a Vein, 
Bold Truths to speak, and spoken to maintain; 
When God-like Freedom is so far bereft  
The Noble Mind, that scarce the Name is left?
Ere Scandalum Magnatum was begot,  
No matter if the Great forgave or not 
But if that honest license now you take,  
If, into Rogues Omnipotent you rake,  
Death is your Doom, impaild upon a Stake:
Smeard ore with Wax, and set on fire, to light  
The Streets, and make a dreadful blaze by night.  
Shall They, who drenchd three Uncles in a draught  
Of poysnous Juice, be then in Triumph brought, 
Make Lanes among the People where they go,
And, mounted high on downy Chariots, throw  
Disdainful glances on the Crowd below?  
Be silent, and beware, if such you see; 
Tis Defamation but to say, Thats He!  
Against bold Turnus the Great Trojan Arm,
Amidst their strokes the Poet gets no harm: 
Achilles may in Epique Verse be slain,  
And none of all his Myrmidons complain: 
Hylas may drop his Pitcher, none will cry;  
Not if he drown himself for company:
But when Lucilius brandishes his Pen, 
And flashes in the face of Guilty Men,  
A cold Sweat stands in drops on evry part; 
And Rage succeeds to Tears, Revenge to Smart. 
Muse, be advisd; tis past considring time
When enterd once the dangerous Lists of Rhime: 
Since none the Living-Villains dare implead,  
Arraign them in the Persons of the Dead.

GRIEVD tho I am, an Ancient Friend to lose,  
I like the Solitary Seat he chose:  
In quiet Cum fixing his Repose:  
Where, far from Noisy Rome secure he Lives, 
And one more Citizen to Sybil gives;
The road to Baj,and that soft Recess  
Which all the Gods with all their Bounty bless. 
Tho I in Prochyta with greater ease 
Coud live, than in a Street of Palaces.  
What Scene so Desart, or so full of Fright,
As towring Houses tumbling in the Night, 
And Rome on Fire beheld by its own Blazing Light? 
But worse than all, the clattring Tiles; and worse 
Than thousand Padders, is the Poets Curse. 
Rogues that in Dog-days cannot Rhime forbear:
But without Mercy read, and make you hear.  
Now while my Friend, just ready to depart,  
Was packing all his Goods in one poor Cart; 
He stoppd a little at the Conduit-Gate,  
Where Numa modelld once the Roman State,
In Mighty Councels with his Nymph retird:  
Though now the Sacred Shades and Founts are hird 
By Banishd Jews, who their whole Wealth can lay  
In a small Basket, on a Wisp of Hay;  
Yet such our Avarice is, that every Tree
Pays for his Head; not Sleep it self is free: 
Nor Place, nor Persons now are Sacred held, 
From their own Grove the Muses are expelld.  
Into this lonely Vale our Steps we bend,  
I and my sullen discontented Friend:
The Marble Caves, and Aquducts we view;  
But how Adultrate now, and different from the true!  
How much more Beauteous had the Fountain been 
Embellisht with her first Created Green, 
Where Crystal Streams through living Turf had run,
Contented with an Urn of Native Stone!  
Then thus Umbricius (with an Angry Frown, 
And looking back on this degenrate Town,)  
Since Noble Arts in Rome have no support, 
And ragged Virtue not a Friend at Court,
No Profit rises from th ungrateful Stage,  
My Poverty encreasing with my Age,  
Tis time to give my just Disdain a vent, 
And, Cursing, leave so base a Government. 
Where Dedalus his borrowd Wings laid by,
To that obscure Retreat I chuse to fly: 
While yet few furrows on my Face are seen,  
While I walk upright, and Old Age is green, 
And Lachesis has somewhat left to spin. 
Now, now tis time to quit this cursed place,
And hide from Villains my too honest Face:  
Here let Arturius live, and such as he; 
Such Manners will with such a Town agree. 
Knaves who in full Assemblies have the knack  
Of turning Truth to Lies, and White to Black;
Can hire large Houses, and oppress the Poor 
By farmd Excise; can cleanse the Common-shoare;  
And rent the Fishery; can bear the dead;  
And teach their Eyes dissembled Tears to shed,  
All this for Gain; for Gain they sell their very Head.
These Fellows (see what Fortunes powr can do) 
Were once the Minstrels of a Country Show:  
Followd the Prizes through each paltry Town, 
By Trumpet-Cheeks and Bloated Faces known.  
But now, grown rich, on drunken Holy-days,
At their own Costs exhibit Publick Plays; 
Where influencd by the Rabbles bloody will, 
With Thumbs bent back, they popularly kill.  
From thence returnd, their sordid Avarice rakes  
In Excrements again, and hires the Jakes.
Why hire they not the Town, not evry thing,  
Since such as they have Fortune in a String?  
Who, for her pleasure, can her Fools advance; 
And toss em topmost on the Wheel of Chance.  
Whats Rome to me, what busness have I there,
I who can neither Lye, nor falsely Swear? 
Nor Praise my Patrons undeserving Rhimes,  
Nor yet comply with him, nor with his Times;  
Unskilld in Schemes by Planets to foreshow,  
Like Canting Rascals, how the Wars will go:
I neither will, nor can Prognosticate 
To the young gaping Heir, his Fathers Fate:  
Nor in the Entrails of a Toad have pryd, 
Nor carryd Bawdy Presents to a Bride:  
For want of these Town Virtues, thus, alone,
I go conducted on my way by none: 
Like a dead Member from the Body rent;  
Maimd, and unuseful to the Government. 
Who now is lovd, but he who loves the Times, 
Conscious of close Intrigues, and dipt in Crimes;
Labring with Secrets which his Bosom burn, 
Yet never must to publick light return? 
They get Reward alone who can Betray: 
For keeping honest Counsels none will pay.  
He who can Verres, when he will, accuse,
The Purse of Verres may at Pleasure use:  
But let not all the Gold which Tagus hides,  
And pays the Sea in Tributary Tides,  
Be Bribe sufficient to corrupt thy Breast;  
Or violate with Dreams thy peaceful rest.
Great Men with jealous Eyes the Friend behold,  
Whose secrecy they purchase with their Gold.  
I haste to tell thee, nor shall Shame oppose, 
What Confidents our Wealthy Romans chose: 
And whom I most abhor: To speak my Mind,
I hate, in Rome, a Grecian Town to find:  
To see the Scum of Greece transplanted here,  
Receivd like Gods, is what I cannot bear.  
Nor Greeks alone, but Syrians here abound,  
Obscene Orontes, diving under Ground,
Conveys his Wealth to Tybers hungry Shoars, 
And fattens Italy with Foreign Whores:  
Hether their crooked Harps and Customs come;  
All find Receipt in Hospitable Rome.  
The Barbarous Harlots crowd the Publick Place:
Go Fools, and purchase an unclean Embrace;  
The painted Mitre court, and the more painted Face. 
Old Romulus, and Father Mars look down,  
Your Herdsman Primitive, your homely Clown  
Is turnd a Beau in a loose tawdry Gown.
His once unkemd, and horrid Locks, behold  
Stilling sweet Oyl; his Neck inchaind with Gold: 
Aping the Foreigners, in evry Dress; 
Which, bought at greater cost, becomes him less.  
Mean time they wisely leave their Native Land,
From Sicyon, Samos, and from Alaband, 
And Amydon, to Rome they Swarm in Shoals: 
So Sweet and Easie is the Gain from Fools.  
Poor Refugies at first, they purchase here: 
And, soon as Denizend, they domineer:
Grow to the Great, a flattring Servile Rout: 
Work themselves inward, and their Patrons out.  
Quick Witted, Brazen-facd, with fluent Tongues,  
Patient of Labours, and dissembling Wrongs  
Riddle me this, and guess him if you can,
Who bears a Nation in a single Man? 
A Cook, a Conjuror, a Rhetorician,  
A Painter, Pedant, a Geometrician,  
A Dancer on the Ropes, and a Physician. 
All things the hungry Greek exactly knows:
And bid him go to Heavn, to Heavn he goes.  
In short, no Scythian, Moor, or Thracian born,  
But in that Town which Arms and Arts adorn.  
Shall he be placd above me at the Board, 
In Purple Cloathd, and lolling like a Lord?
Shall he before me sign, whom tother Day 
A small-craft Vessel hither did convey; 
Where, stowd with Prunes, and rotten Figs, he lay? 
How little is the Priviledge become 
Of being born a Citizen of Rome!
The Greeks get all by fulsom Flatteries;  
A most peculiar Stroke they have at Lies. 
They make a Wit of their Insipid Friend;  
His blobber-Lips, and beetle-Brows commend; 
His long Crane Neck, and narrow Shoulders Praise;
Youd think they were describing Hercules.  
A creaking Voice for a clear Trebble goes;  
Tho harsher than a Cock that Treads and Crows.  
We can as grosly praise; but, to our Grief, 
No Flattry but from Grecians gains belief.
Besides these Qualities, we must agree  
They Mimick better on the Stage than we 
The Wife, the Whore, the Shepherdess they play, 
In such a Free, and such a Graceful way,  
That we believe a very Woman shown,
And fancy something underneath the Gown.  
But not Antiochus, nor Stratocles, 
Our Ears and Ravishd Eyes can only please: 
The Nation is composd of such as these.  
All Greece is one Commedian: Laugh, and they
Return it louder than an Ass can bray:  
Grieve, and they Grieve; if you Weep silently,  
There seems a silent Eccho in their Eye:  
They cannot Mourn like you; but they can Cry. 
Call for a Fire, their Winter Cloaths they take:
Begin but you to shiver, and they shake:  
In Frost and Snow, if you complain of Heat, 
They rub th unsweating Brow, and Swear they Sweat. 
We live not on the Square with such as these: 
Such are our Betters who can better please:
Who Day and Night are like a Looking-Glass; 
Still ready to reflect their Patrons Face. 
The Panegyrick Hand, and lifted Eye,  
Prepard for some new Piece of Flattery.  
Evn Nastiness, Occasions will afford;
They praise a belching, or well-pissing Lord. 
Besides, theres nothing Sacred, nothing free 
From bold Attempts of their rank Leachery 
Through the whole Family their labours run; 
The Daughter is debauchd, the Wife is won:
Nor scapes the Bridegroom, or the blooming Son. 
If none they find for their lewd purpose fit, 
They with the Walls and very Floors commit. 
They search the Secrets of the House, and so  
Are worshippd there, and feard for what they know.
And, now we talk of Grecians, cast a view 
On what, in Schools, their Men of Morals do;  
A rigid Stoick his own Pupil slew. 
A Friend, against a Friend, of his own Cloath,  
Turnd Evidence, and murtherd on his Oath.
What room is left for Romans, in a Town 
Where Grecians rule, and Cloaks control the Gown? 
Some Diphilus, or some Protogenes, 
Look sharply out, our Senators to seize:  
Engross em wholly, by their Native Art,
And fear no Rivals in their Bubbles heart:  
One drop of Poison in my Patrons Ear,  
One slight suggestion of a senseless fear,  
Infusd, with cunning, serves to ruine me;  
Disgracd, and banishd from the Family.
In vain forgotten Services I boast; 
My long dependance in an hour is lost:  
Look round the World, what Country will appear, 
Where Friends are left with greater ease than here? 
At Rome (nor think me partial to the Poor)
All Offices of ours are out of Door:  
In vain we rise, and to their Levees run; 
My Lord himself is up, before, and gone:  
The Praetor bids his Lictors mend their pace, 
Lest his Collegue outstrip him in the Race:
The childless Matrons are, long since, awake; 
And for Affronts the tardy Visits take. 
Tis frequent, here, to see a free-born Son 
On the left-hand of a Rich Hireling run:  
Because the wealthy Rogue can throw away,
For half a Brace of Bouts, a Tribunes pay  
But you, poor Sinner, tho you love the Vice,  
And like the Whore, demurr upon the Price:  
And, frighted with the wicked Sum, forbear  
To lend a hand, and help her from the Chair.
Produce a Witness of unblemishd life,  
Holy as Numa, or as Numas Wife,  
Or him who bid th unhallowd Flames retire; 
And snatchd the trembling Goddess from the Fire. 
The Question is not put how far extends
His Piety, but what he yearly spends: 
Quick, to the Busness; how he Lives and Eats;  
How largely Gives; how splendidly he Treats:  
How many thousand Acres feed his Sheep, 
What are his Rents, what Servants does he keep?
Th Account is soon cast up; the Judges rate  
Our Credit in the Court by our Estate.  
Swear by our Gods, or those the Greeks adore, 
Thou art as sure Forsworn, as thou art Poor:  
The Poor must gain their Bread by Perjury;
And even the Gods, that other Means deny, 
In Conscience must absolve em, when they lye.  
Add, that the Rich have still a Gibe in store;  
And will be monstrous witty on the Poor:  
For the torn Surtout and the tatterd Vest,
The Wretch and all his Wardrobe are a Jest: 
The greasie Gown, sullyd with often turning, 
Gives a good hint, to say The Mans in Mourning:  
Or if the Shoo be ript, or patches put, 
Hes wounded! see the Plaister on his Foot.
Want is the Scorn of evry Wealthy Fool;  
And Wit in Rags is turnd to Ridicule.  
Pack hence, and from the Coverd Benches rise,  
(The Master of the Ceremonies cries)  
This is no place for you, whose small Estate
Is not the Value of the settled Rate: 
The Sons of happy Punks, the Pandars Heir,  
Are priviledgd to sit in triumph there,  
To clap the first, and rule the Theatre.  
Up to the Galleries, for shame, retreat:
For, by the Roscian Law, the Poor can claim no Seat. 
Who ever brought to his rich Daughters Bed 
The Man that polld but Twelve-pence for his Head?  
Who ever namd a poor Man for his Heir, 
Or calld him to assist the Judging Chair?
The Poor were wise, who by the Rich oppressd,  
Withdrew, and sought a Sacred Place of Rest.  
Once they did well, to free themselves from Scorn;  
But had done better never to return.  
Rarely they rise by Virtues aid, who lie
Plungd in the depth of helpless Poverty. 
At Rome tis worse; where House-rent by the Year, 
And Servants Bellies cost so Devllish dear;  
And Tavern Bills run high for hungry Chear. 
To drink or eat in Earthen Ware we scorn,
Which cheaply Country Cupboards does adorn: 
And coarse blue Hoods on Holydays are worn. 
Some distant parts of Italy are known,  
Where none, but only dead Men, wear a Gown:  
On Theatres of Turf, in homely State,
Old Plays they act, old Feasts they Celebrate:  
The same rude Song returns upon the Crowd,  
And, by Tradition, is for Wit allowd.  
The Mimick Yearly gives the same Delights;  
And in the Mothers Arms the Clownish Infant frights.
Their Habits (undistinguishd by degree)  
Are plain, alike; the same Simplicity,  
Both on the Stage, and in the Pit, you see. 
In his white Cloak the Magistrate appears;  
The Country Bumpkin the same Livry wears.
But here, Attird beyond our Purse we go, 
For useless Ornament and flaunting Show:  
We take on trust, in Purple Robes to shine; 
And Poor, are yet Ambitious to be fine. 
This is a common Vice, tho all things here
Are sold, and sold unconscionably dear. 
What will you give that Cossus may but view  
Your Face, and in the Crowd distinguish you;  
May take your Incense like a gracious God;  
And answer only with a Civil Nod?
To please our Patrons, in this vicious Age, 
We make our Entrance by the Favrite Page:  
Shave his first down, and when he Polls his Hair, 
The Consecrated Locks to Temples bear:  
Pay Tributary Cracknels, which he sells;
And, with our Offerings, help to raise his Vails. 
Who fears, in Country Towns, a Houses fall,  
Or to be caught betwixt a riven Wall? 
But we Inhabit a weak City here;  
Which Buttresses and Props but scarcely bear:
And tis the Village Masons daily Calling,  
To keep the Worlds Metropolis from falling,  
To cleanse the Gutters, and the Chinks to close;  
And, for one Night, secure his Lords Repose. 
At Cum we can sleep, quite round the Year,
Nor Falls, nor Fires, nor Nightly Dangers fear; 
While rolling Flames from Roman Turrets fly,  
And the pale Citizens for Buckets cry.  
Thy Neighbour has removd his Wretched Store, 
(Few Hands will rid the Lumber of the Poor)
Thy own third Story smoaks; while thou, supine, 
Art drenchd in Fumes of undigested Wine. 
For if the lowest Floors already burn,  
Cock-lofts and Garrets soon will take the Turn. 
Where thy tame Pidgeons next the Tiles were bred,
Which in their Nests unsafe, are timely fled. 
Codrus had but one Bed, so short to boot,  
That his short Wifes short Legs hung dangling out; 
His Cup-boards Head six Earthen Pitchers gracd, 
Beneath em was his Trusty Tankard placd:
And, to support this Noble Plate, there lay 
A bending Chiron cast from honest Clay: 
His few Greek Books a rotten Chest containd, 
Whose Covers much of mouldiness complaind: 
Where Mice and Rats devourd Poetick Bread,
And with Heroick Verse luxuriously were fed.  
Tis true, poor Codrus nothing had to boast,  
And yet poor Codrus all that Nothing lost;  
Begd naked through the Streets of wealthy Rome;  
And found not one to feed, or take him home.
But if the Palace of Arturius burn, 
The Nobles change their Cloaths, the Matrons mourn; 
The City Prtor will no Pleadings hear; 
The very Name of Fire we hate and fear: 
And look agast, as if the Gauls were here.
While yet it burns, th officious Nation flies, 
Some to condole, and some to bring supplies:  
One sends him Marble to rebuild, and one  
White naked Statues of the Parian Stone,  
The Work of Polyclete, that seem to live;
While others, Images for Altars give; 
One Books and Skreens, and Pallas to the Brest; 
Another Bags of Gold, and he gives best.  
Childless Arturius, vastly rich before, 
Thus by his Losses multiplies his Store:
Suspected for Accomplice to the Fire, 
That burnt his Palace but to build it higher. 
But, coud you be content to bid adieu  
To the dear Play-house, and the Players too,  
Sweet Country Seats are purchasd evry where,
With Lands and Gardens, at less price, than here  
You hire a darksom Doghole by the year. 
A small Convenience, decently prepard, 
A shallow Well, that rises in your yard,  
That spreads his easie Crystal Streams around,
And waters all the pretty spot of Ground. 
There, love the Fork; thy Garden cultivate, 
And give thy frugal Friends a Pythagorean Treat. 
Tis somewhat to be Lord of some small Ground;  
In which a Lizard may, at least, turn round.
Tis frequent, here, for want of sleep to dye;  
Which Fumes of undigested Feasts deny;  
And, with imperfect heat, in languid Stomachs fry.  
What House secure from noise the poor can keep, 
When evn the Rich can scarce afford to sleep?
So dear it costs to purchase Rest in Rome;  
And hence the sources of Diseases come. 
The Drover who his Fellow-drover meets, 
In narrow passages of winding Streets:  
The Waggoners, that curse their standing Teams,
Would wake evn drowsie Drusus from his Dreams. 
And yet the Wealthy will not brook delay; 
But sweep above our Heads, and make their way;  
In lofty Litters born, and read and write,  
Or sleep at ease: The Shutters make it Night.
Yet still he reaches, first, the Publick Place: 
The prease before him stops the Clients pace.  
The Crowd that follows, crush his panting sides,  
And trip his heels; he walks not, but he rides. 
One Elbows him, one justles in the Shole:
A Rafter breaks his Head, or Chairmans Pole: 
Stockind with loads of fat Town-dirt he goes;  
And some Rogue-Souldier, with his Hobnaild Shoos,  
Indents his Legs behind in bloody rows. 
See with what Smoke our Doles we celebrate:
A hundred Ghests, invited, walk in state: 
A hundred hungry Slaves, with their Dutch Kitchins wait.  
Huge Pans the Wretches on their heads must bear; 
Which scarce Gygantick Corbulo coud rear: 
Yet they must walk upright beneath the load;
Nay run, and running blow the sparkling flames abroad.  
Their Coats, from botching newly brought, are torn: 
Unwieldy Timber-trees, in Waggons born, 
Stretchd at their length, beyond their Carriage lye; 
That nod, and threaten ruin from on high.
For, should their Axel break, its overthrow 
Woud crush, and pound to dust, the Crowd below;  
Nor Friends their Friends, nor Sires their Sons coud know: 
Nor Limbs, nor Bones, nor Carcass woud remain: 
But a mashd heap, a Hotchpotch of the Slain.
One vast destruction; not the Soul alone, 
But Bodies, like the Soul, invisible are flown. 
Mean time, unknowing of their Fellows Fate, 
The Servants wash the Platter, scour the Plate, 
Then blow the Fire, with puffing Cheeks, and lay
The Rubbers, and the Bathing-sheets display;  
And oyl them first; and each is handy in his way. 
But he, for whom this busie care they take, 
Poor Ghost, is wandring by the Stygian Lake:  
Affrighted with the Ferrymans grim Face;
New to the Horrours of that uncouth place;  
His passage begs with unregarded Prayr:  
And wants two Farthings to discharge his Fare.  
Return we to the Dangers of the Night;  
And, first, behold our Houses dreadful height:
From whence come broken Potsherds tumbling down;  
And leaky Ware, from Garret Windows thrown: 
Well may they break our Heads, that mark the flinty Stone.  
Tis want of Sence to sup abroad too late;  
Unless thou first hast settled thy Estate.
As many Fates attend, thy Steps to meet,  
As there are waking Windows in the Street.  
Bless the good Gods, and think thy chance is rare 
To have a Piss-pot only for thy share.  
The scouring Drunkard, if he does not fight
Before his Bed-time, takes no rest that Night,  
Passing the tedious Hours in greater pain 
Than stern Achilles, when his Friend was slain:  
Tis so ridiculous, but so true withall,  
A Bully cannot sleep without a Braul:
Yet tho his youthful Blood be fird with Wine,  
He wants not Wit, the Danger to decline:  
Is cautious to avoid the Coach and Six, 
And on the Lacquies will no Quarrel fix 
His Train of Flambeaus, and Embroiderd Coat
May Priviledge my Lord to walk secure on Foot.  
But me, who must by Moon-light homeward bend, 
Or lighted only with a Candles end,  
Poor me he fights, if that be fighting, where 
He only Cudgels, and I only bear.
He stands, and bids me stand: I must abide; 
For hes the stronger, and is Drunk beside. 
Where did you whet your Knife to Night, he cries, 
And shred the Leeks that in your Stomach rise?  
Whose windy Beans have stufft your Guts, and where
Have your black Thumbs been dipt in Vinegar?  
With what Companion Cobler have you fed,  
On old Ox-cheeks, or He-Goats tougher Head? 
What, are you Dumb? Quick with your Answer, quick,  
Before my Foot Salutes you with a Kick.
Say, in what nasty Cellar, under Ground,  
Or what Church-Porch, your Rogueship may be found?  
Answer, or Answer not, tis all the same: 
He lays me on, and makes me bear the blame. 
Before the Bar, for beating him, you come;
This is a Poor Mans Liberty in Rome. 
You beg his Pardon; happy to retreat  
With some remaining Teeth, to chew your Meat. 
Nor is this all; for, when Retird, you think 
To sleep securely; when the Candles wink,
When every Door with Iron Chains is barrd, 
And roaring Taverns are no longer heard;  
The Ruffian Robbers by no Justice awd, 
And unpaid cut-Throat Soldiers, are abroad; 
Those Venal Souls, who, hardend in each ill
To save Complaints and Prosecution, kill. 
Chasd from their Woods and Bogs, the Padders come  
To this vast City, as their Native Home;  
To live at ease, and safely sculk in Rome.  
The Forge in Fetters only is employd;
Our Iron Mines exhausted and destroyd  
In Shackles; for these Villains scarce allow  
Goads for the Teams, and Plough-shares for the Plough.  
Oh happy Ages of our Ancestours,  
Beneath the Kings and Tribunitial Powrs!
One Jayl did all their Criminals restrain;  
Which, now, the Walls of Rome can scarce contain. 
More I coud say, more Causes I coud show  
For my departure; but the Sun is low: 
The Waggoner grows weary of my stay;
And whips his Horses forwards on their way. 
Farewell; and when, like me, orewhelmd with care. 
You to your own Aquinum shall repair,  
To take a mouthful of sweet Country air,  
Be mindful of your Friend; and send me word,
What Joys your Fountains and cool Shades afford:  
Then, to assist your Satyrs, I will come; 
And add new Venom, when you write of Rome.

IN Saturns Reign, at Natures Early Birth, 
There was that Thing calld Chastity on Earth;  
When in a narrow Cave, their common shade,  
The Sheep the Shepherds and their Gods were laid: 
When Reeds and Leaves, and Hides of Beasts were spread
By Mountain Huswifes for their homely Bed,  
And Mossy Pillows raisd, for the rude Husbands head.  
Unlike the Niceness of our Modern Dames,  
(Affected Nymphs with new affected Names:)  
The Cynthias and the Lesbias of our Years,
Who for a Sparrows Death dissolve in Tears.  
Those first unpolisht Matrons, Big and Bold,  
Gave Suck to Infants of Gygantick Mold; 
Rough as their Savage Lords who Rangd the Wood,  
And fat with Akorns Belcht their windy Food.
For when the World was Bucksom, fresh, and young, 
Her Sons were undebauchd, and therefore strong;  
And whether Born in kindly Beds of Earth, 
Or strugling from the Teeming Oaks to Birth,  
Or from what other Atoms they begun,
No Sires they had, or if a Sire the Sun.  
Some thin Remains of Chastity appeard  
Evn under Jove, but Jove without a Beard;  
Before the servile Greeks had learnt to Swear 
By Heads of Kings; while yet the Bounteous Year
Her common Fruits in open Plains exposd, 
Ere thieves were feard, or Gardens were enclosd. 
At length uneasie Justice upwards flew, 
And both the Sisters to the Stars withdrew; 
From that Old ra Whoring did begin,
So Venerably Ancient is the Sin.  
Adultrers next invade the Nuptial State, 
And Marriage-Beds creakd with a Foreign Weight;  
All other Ills did Iron times adorn;  
But Whores and Silver in one Age were Born.
Yet thou, they say, for Marriage dost provide: 
Is this an Age to Buckle with a Bride?  
They say thy Hair the Curling Art is taught,  
The Wedding-Ring perhaps already bought:  
A Sober Man like thee to change his Life!
What Fury woud possess thee with a Wife? 
Art thou of evry other Death bereft, 
No Knife, no Ratsbane, no kind Halter left? 
(For every Noose compard to Hers is cheap) 
Is there no City-Bridge from whence to leap?
Wouldst thou become her Drudge, who dost enjoy 
A better sort of Bedfellow, thy Boy?  
He keeps thee not awake with nightly Brawls,  
Nor with a begd Reward, thy Pleasure palls;  
Nor with insatiate heavings calls for more,
When all thy Spirits were draind out before. 
But still Ursidius Courts the Marriage-Bait,  
Longs for a Son, to settle his Estate,  
And takes no Gifts, tho every gapeing Heir  
Woud gladly Grease the Rich Old Batchelour.
What Revolution can appear so strange,  
As such a Leacher, such a Life to change? 
A rank, notorious Whoremaster, to choose  
To thrust his Neck into the Marriage-Noose! 
He who so often in a dreadful fright
Had in a Coffer scapd the jealous Cuckolds sight,  
That he, to Wedlock dotingly betrayd,  
Should hope, in this lewd Town, to find a Maid! 
The Mans grown Mad: To ease his Frantick Pain, 
Run for the Surgeon; breathe the middle Vein:
But let a Heyfer with gilt Horns be led 
To Juno, Regent of the Marriage-Bed,  
And let him every Deity adore,  
If his new Bride prove not an arrant Whore, 
In Head and Tail, and every other Pore.
On Ceres feast, restraind from their delight,  
Few Matrons, there, but Curse the tedious Night:  
Few whom their Fathers dare Salute, such Lust 
Their Kisses have, and come with such a Gust. 
With Ivy now Adorn thy Doors, and Wed;
Such is thy Bride, and such thy Genial Bed. 
Thinkst thou one Man is for one Woman meant? 
She, sooner, with one Eye woud be content  
And yet, tis noisd, a Maid did once appear  
In some small Village, tho Fame says not where:
Tis possible; but sure no Man she found; 
Twas desart, all, about her Fathers Ground: 
And yet some Lustful God might there make bold; 
Are Jove and Mars grown impotent and old? 
Many a fair Nymph has in a Cave been spread,
And much good Love, without a Feather-Bed.  
Whither woudst thou to chuse a Wife resort,  
The Park, the Mall, the Play-house, or the Court? 
Which way soever thy Adventures fall, 
Secure alike of Chastity in all.
One sees a Dancing-Master Capring high, 
And Raves, and Pisses, with pure Extasie: 
Another does, with all his Motions, move, 
And Gapes, and Grins as in the feat of Love:  
A third is Charmd with the new Opera Notes,
Admires the Song, but on the Singer Doats:  
The Country Lady in the Box appears,  
Softly She Warbles over all she hears;  
And sucks in Passion, both at Eyes and Ears.  
The rest, (when now the long Vacations come,
The noisie Hall and Theatres grown dumb)  
Their Memories to refresh, and chear their hearts,  
In borrowd Breaches act the Players parts. 
The Poor, that scarce have wherewithal to eat,  
Will pinch, to make the Singing-Boy a Treat.
The Rich, to buy him, will refuse no price; 
And stretch his Quail-pipe, till they crack his Voice.  
Tragedians, acting Love, for Lust are sought: 
(Tho but the Parrots of a Poets Thought.)  
The Pleading Lawyer, tho for Counsel usd,
In Chamber-practice often is refusd. 
Still thou wilt have a Wife, and father Heirs;  
(The product of concurring Theatres.) 
Perhaps a Fencer did thy Brows adorn, 
And a young Sword-man to thy Lands is born.
Thus Hippia loathd her old Patrician Lord, 
And left him for a Brother of the Sword:  
To wondring Pharos with her Love she fled,  
To show one Monster more than Africk bred:  
Forgetting House and Husband, left behind,
Evn Children too; she sails before the wind; 
False to em all, but constant to her Kind. 
But, stranger yet, and harder to conceive,  
She coud the Play-house and the Players leave. 
Born of rich Parentage, and nicely bred,
She lodgd on Down, and in a Damask Bed;  
Yet, daring now the Dangers of the Deep,  
On a hard Mattress is content to sleep. 
Ere this, tis true, she did her Fame expose:  
But that, great Ladies with great Ease can lose.
The tender Nymph coud the rude Ocean bear: 
So much her Lust was stronger than her Fear.  
But, had some honest Cause her Passage prest, 
The smallest hardship had disturbd her brest:  
Each Inconvenience makes their Virtue cold;
But Womankind, in Ills, is ever bold. 
Were she to follow her own Lord to Sea, 
What doubts and scruples woud she raise to stay? 
Her Stomach sick, and her head giddy grows; 
The Tar and Pitch are nauseous to her Nose.
But in Loves Voyage nothing can offend;  
Women are never Sea-sick with a Friend. 
Amidst the Crew, she walks upon the boord;  
She eats, she drinks, she handles every Cord: 
And, if she spews, tis thinking of her Lord.
Now ask, for whom her Friends and Fame she lost?  
What Youth, what Beauty coud th Adultrer boast?  
What was the Face, for which she coud sustain  
To be calld Mistress to so base a Man? 
The Gallant, of his days had known the best:
Deep Scars were seen indented on his breast;  
And all his batterd Limbs requird their needful rest. 
A Promontory Wen, with griesly grace, 
Stood high, upon the Handle of his Face:  
His blear Eyes ran in gutters to his Chin:
His Beard was Stubble, and his Cheeks were thin.  
But twas his Fencing did her Fancy move: 
Tis Arms and Blood and Cruelty they love.  
But should he quit his Trade, and sheath his Sword, 
Her Lover woud begin to be her Lord.
This was a private Crime; but you shall hear  
What Fruits the Sacred Brows of Monarchs bear:  
The good old Sluggard but began to snore, 
When from his side up rose th Imperial Whore:  
She who preferrd the Pleasures of the Night
To Pomps, that are but impotent delight;  
Strode from the Palace, with an eager pace, 
To cope with a more Masculine Embrace;  
Muffled she marchd, like Juno in a Clowd,  
Of all her Train but one poor Wench allowd,
One whom in Secret Service she coud trust; 
The Rival and Companion of her Lust.  
To the known Brothel-house she takes her way; 
And for a nasty Room gives double pay;  
That Room in which the rankest Harlot lay.
Prepard for fight, expectingly she lies, 
With heaving Breasts, and with desiring Eyes: 
Still as one drops, another takes his place,  
And baffled still succeeds to like disgrace.  
At length, when friendly darkness is expird,
And every Strumpet from her Cell retird, 
She lags behind, and lingring at the Gate,  
With a repining Sigh, submits to Fate:  
All Filth without, and all a Fire within, 
Tird with the Toyl, unsated with the Sin,
Old Csars Bed the modest Matron seeks;  
The steam of Lamps still hanging on her Checks, 
In Ropy Smut: thus foul, and thus bedight,  
She brings him back the Product of the Night. 
Now should I sing what Poisons they provide;
With all their Trumpery of Charms beside; 
And all their Arts of Death: it would be known  
Lust is the smallest Sin the Sex can own. 
Csinia, still, they say, is guiltless found  
Of evry Vice, by her own Lord Renownd:
And well she may, she brought ten thousand Pound. 
She brought him wherewithal to be calld chaste;  
His Tongue is tyd in Golden Fetters fast 
He Sighs, Adores, and Courts her every Hour;  
Who woud not do as much for such a Dower?
She writes Love-Letters to the Youth in Grace;  
Nay tips the wink before the Cuckolds Face;  
And might do more; Her Portion makes it good; 
Wealth has the Priviledge of Widow-hood.  
These Truths with his Example you disprove,
Who with his Wife is monstrously in Love: 
But know him better; for I heard him Swear, 
Tis not that Shes his Wife, but that Shes Fair.  
Let her but have three wrinkles in her Face,  
Let her Eyes Lessen, and her Skin unbrace,
Soon you will hear the Saucy Steward say, 
Pack up with all your Trinkets, and away; 
You grow Offensive both at Bed and Board: 
Your Betters must be had to please my Lord. 
Meantime Shes absolute upon the Throne;
And knowing time is Precious, loses none: 
She must have Flocks of Sheep, with Wool more Fine  
Than Silk, and Vinyards of the Noblest Wine:  
Whole Droves of Pages for her Train she Craves: 
And sweeps the Prisons for attending Slaves.
In short, whatever in her Eyes can come,  
Or others have abroad, she wants at home. 
When Winter shuts the Seas, and fleecy Snows  
Make Houses white, she to the Merchant goes;  
Rich Crystals of the Rock She takes up there,
Huge Agat Vases, and old China Ware:  
Then Berenices Ring her Finger proves,  
More Precious made by her incestuous Loves: 
And infamously Dear: A Brothers Bribe, 
Evn Gods Annointed, and of Judahs Tribe:
Where barefoot they approach the Sacred Shrine, 
And think it only Sin, to feed on Swine.  
But is none worthy to be made a Wife  
In all this Town? Suppose her free from strife, 
Rich, Fair, and Fruitful, of Unblemishd Life;
Chast as the Sabines, whose prevailing Charms 
Dismissd their Husbands, and their Brothers Arms.  
Grant her, besides, of Noble Blood, that ran  
In Ancient Veins, ere Heraldry began:  
Suppose all these, and take a Poets word,
A Black Swan is not half so Rare a Bird.  
A Wife, so hung with Virtues, such a freight, 
What Mortal Shoulders coud support the weight! 
Some Country Girl, scarce to a Curtsey bred,  
Woud I much rather than Cornelia Wed:
If Supercilious, Haughty, Proud, and Vain,  
She brought her Fathers Triumphs in her Train. 
Away with all your Carthaginian State,  
Let vanquishd Hannibal without Doors wait, 
Too burly and too big to pass my narrow Gate.
Oh Pan, cries Amphion, bend thy Bow 
Against my Wife, and let my Children go 
But sullen Pan shoots at Sons and Mothers too. 
His Niobe and all his Boys he lost; 
Evn her who did her numrous Offspring boast,
As Fair and Fruitful as the Sow that carryd  
The Thirty Pigs at one large Litter Farrowd.  
What Beauty or what Chastity can bear 
So great a Price, if stately and severe 
She still insults, and you must still adore?
Grant that the Honys much, the Gall is more. 
Upbraided with the Virtues she displays,  
Sevn Hours in Twelve, you loath the Wife you Praise: 
Some Faults, tho small, intolerable grow; 
For what so Nauseous and Affected too,
As those that think they due Perfection want, 
Who have not learnt to Lisp the Grecian Cant?  
In Greece, their whole Accomplishments they seek: 
Their Fashion, Breeding, Language, must be Greek: 
But Raw in all that does to Rome belong,
They scorn to cultivate their Mother Tongue.  
In Greek they flatter, all their Fears they speak,  
Tell all their Secrets; nay, they Scold in Greek: 
Evn in the Feat of Love, they use that Tongue. 
Such Affectations may become the Young;
But thou, Old Hag, of Threescore Years and Three, 
Is shewing of thy Parts in Greek for thee?  
[Greek]! All those tender words  
The Momentary trembling Bliss affords,  
The kind soft Murmurs of the private Sheets,
Are Bawdy, while thou speakst in publick Streets.  
Those words have Fingers; and their force is such,  
They raise the Dead, and mount him with a touch.  
But all Provocatives from thee are vain:  
No blandishment the slackend Nerve can strain.
If then thy Lawful Spouse thou canst not love,  
What reason shoud thy Mind to Marriage move? 
Why all the Charges of the Nuptial Feast, 
Wine and Deserts and Sweet-meats to digest? 
Th indoweing Gold that buys the dear Delight,
Givn for thy first and only happy Night?  
If thou art thus Uxoriously inclind, 
To bear thy Bondage with a willing mind,  
Prepare thy Neck, and put it in the Yoke: 
But for no mercy from thy Woman look.
For tho, perhaps, she loves with equal Fires, 
To Absolute Dominion she aspires; 
Joys in the Spoils, and Triumphs oer thy Purse;  
The better Husband makes the Wife the worse.  
Nothing is thine to give, or sell, or buy,
All Offices of Ancient Friendship dye;  
Nor hast thou leave to make a Legacy.  
By thy Imperious Wife thou art bereft 
A Priviledge, to Pimps and Panders left;  
Thy Testaments her Will; Where she prefers
Her Ruffians, Drudges, and Adulterers,  
Adopting all thy Rivals for thy Heirs.  
Go drag that Slave to Death; your Reason, why 
Shoud the poor Innocent be doomd to Dye?  
What proofs? for, when Mans Life is in debate,
The Judge can nere too long deliberate.  
Callst thou that Slave a Man? the Wife replies: 
Provd, or unprovd, the Crime, the Villain Dies. 
I have the Soveraign Powr to save or kill; 
And give no other Reason but my Will.
Thus the She-Tyrant Reigns, till pleasd with change, 
Her wild Affections to New Empires Range: 
Another Subject-Husband she desires;  
Divorcd from him, she to the first retires,  
While the last Wedding-Feast is scarcely ore,
And Garlands hang yet green upon the Door.  
So still the Reckning rises; and appears 
In total Sum, Eight Husbands in Five Years. 
The Title for a Tomb-Stone might be fit;  
But that it woud too commonly be writ.
Her Mother Living, hope no quiet Day; 
She sharpens her, instructs her how to Flea 
Her Husband bare, and then divides the Prey.  
She takes Love-Letters, with a Crafty smile,  
And, in her Daughters Answer, mends the stile.
In vain the Husband sets his watchful Spies;  
She Cheats their cunning, or she bribes their Eyes. 
The Doctors calld; the Daughter, taught the Trick,  
Pretends to faint; and in full Health is Sick.  
The Panting Stallion, at the Closet-Door,
Hears the Consult, and wishes it were ore. 
Canst thou, in Reason, hope, a Bawd so known 
Shoud teach her other Manners than her own?  
Her Intrest is in all th Advice she gives:  
Tis on the Daughters Rents the Mother lives.
No Cause is tryd at the Litigious Bar, 
But Women Plaintiffs or Defendants are, 
They form the Process, all the Briefs they write, 
The Topicks furnish, and the Pleas indite;  
And teach the Toothless Lawyer how to Bite.
They turn Viragos too; the Wrastlers toyl 
They try, and Smear their Naked Limbs with Oyl: 
Against the Post, their wicker Shields they crush,  
Flourish the Sword, and at the Plastron push  
Of every Exercise the Mannish Crew
Fulfils the Parts, and oft Excels us too; 
Prepard not only in feignd Fights t engage,  
But rout the Gladiators on the Stage. 
What sence of shame in such a Breast can lye, 
Inurd to Arms, and her own Sex to fly?
Yet to be wholly Man she woud disclaim;  
To quit her tenfold Pleasure at the Game, 
For frothy Praises, and an Empty Name.  
Oh what a decent Sight tis to behold 
All thy Wifes Magazine by Auction sold!
The Belt, the crested Plume, the several Suits  
Of Armour, and the Spanish Leather Boots! 
Yet these are they, that cannot bear the heat 
Of figurd Silks, and under Sarcenet sweat. 
Behold the strutting Amazonian Whore,
She stands in Guard with her right Foot before: 
Her Coats Tuckd up; and all her Motions just,  
She stamps, and then Cries, hah at evry thrust:  
But laugh to see her, tyrd with many a bout, 
Call for the Pot, and like a Man Piss out.
The Ghosts of Ancient Romans, shoud they rise, 
Woud grin to see their Daughters play a Prize. 
Besides, what endless Brawls by Wifes are bred:  
The Curtain-Lecture makes a Mournful Bed. 
Then, when she has thee sure within the Sheets,
Her Cry begins, and the whole Day repeats.  
Conscious of Crimes her self, she teyzes first; 
Thy Servants are accusd; thy Whore is curst; 
She Acts the jealous, and at Will she cries;  
For Womens Tears are but the sweat of Eyes.
Poor Cuckold-Fool, thou thinkst that Love sincere, 
And suckst between her Lips, the falling Tear: 
But search her Cabinet, and thou shalt find 
Each Tiller there with Love Epistles lind. 
Suppose her taken in a close embrace,
This you woud think so manifest a Case,  
No Rhetorick could defend, no Impudence outface:  
And yet even then she Cries the Marriage Vow  
A mental Reservation must allow;  
And theres a silent bargain still implyd,
The Parties shoud be pleasd on either side: 
And both may for their private needs provide. 
Tho Men your selves, and Women us you call, 
Yet Homo is a Common Name for all.  
Theres nothing bolder than a Woman Caught;
Guilt gives em Courage to maintain their Fault.  
You ask from whence proceed these monstrous Crimes? 
Once Poor, and therefore Chast, in former times,  
Our Matrons were: No Luxury found room  
In low-rooft Houses, and bare Walls of Lome;
Their Hands with Labour hardned while twas Light, 
And Frugal sleep supplyd the quiet Night,  
While pincht with want, their Hunger held em straight;  
When Hannibal was Hovring at the Gate:  
But wanton now, and lolling at our Ease,
We suffer all th invetrate ills of Peace, 
And wastful Riot; whose Destructive Charms  
Revenge the vanquishd World, of our Victorious Arms. 
No Crime, no Lustful Postures are unknown;  
Since Poverty, our Guardian-God, is gone:
Pride, Laziness, and all Luxurious Arts,  
Pour like a Deluge in, from Foreign Parts:  
Since Gold Obscene, and Silver found the way, 
Strange Fashions with strange Bullion to convey,  
And our plain simple Manners to betray.
What care our Drunken Dames to whom they spread?  
Wine no distinction makes of Tail or Head.  
Who lewdly Dancing at a Midnight-Ball,  
For hot Eringoes, and Fat Oysters call: 
Full Brimmers to their Fuddled Noses thrust;
Brimmers the last Provocatives of Lust, 
When Vapours to their swimming Brains advance,  
And double Tapers on the Tables dance.  
Now think what Bawdy Dialogues they have, 
What Tullia talks to her confiding Slave,
At Modestys old Statue: when by Night  
They make a stand, and from their Litters light;  
The Good Man early to the Levee goes, 
And treads the Nasty Paddle of his Spouse.  
The Secrets of the Goddess namd the Good,
Are even by Boys and Barbers understood:  
Where the Rank Matrons, Dancing to the Pipe,  
Gig with their Bums, and are for Action ripe; 
With Musick raisd, they spread abroad their Hair;  
And toss their Heads like an enamourd Mare:
Laufella lays her Garland by, and proves  
The mimick Leachery of Manly Loves. 
Rankd with the Lady, the cheap Sinner lies;  
For here not Blood, but Virtue gives the prize. 
Nothing is feignd in this Venereal Strife;
Tis downright Lust, and Acted to the Life. 
So full, so fierce, so vigorous, and so strong, 
That, looking on, woud make old Nestor Young. 
Impatient of delay, a general sound,  
An universal Groan of Lust goes round;
For then, and only then, the Sex sincere is found.  
Now is the time of Action; now begin, 
They cry, and let the lusty Lovers in.  
The Whoresons are asleep; Then bring the Slaves 
And Watermen, a Race of strong-backd Knaves.
I wish, at least, our Sacred Rites were free  
From those Pollutions of Obscenity: 
But tis well known what Singer, how disguisd,  
A lewd audacious Action enterprizd:  
Into the Fair with Women mixt, he went,
Armd with a huge two-handed Instrument;  
A grateful Present to those holy Quires,  
Where the Mouse guilty of his Sex retires:  
And even Male-Pictures modestly are vaild;  
Yet no Profaneness on that Age prevaild;
No Scoffers at Religious Rites were found: 
Tho now, at every Altar they abound.  
I hear your cautious Counsel, you woud say,  
Keep close your Women under Lock and Key: 
But, who shall keep those Keepers? Women, nurst
In Craft, begin with those, and Bribe em first.  
The Sex is turnd all Whore; they Love the Game:  
And Mistresses, and Maids, are both the same. 
The poor Ogulnia, on the Poets day,  
Will borrow Cloaths, and Chair, to see the Play:
She, who before had Mortgagd her Estate, 
And Pawnd the last remaining piece of Plate. 
Some are reducd their utmost Shifts to try:  
But Women have no shame of Poverty. 
They live beyond their stint; as if their store
The more exhausted, woud increase the more:  
Some Men, instructed by the Labring Ant, 
Provide against th Extremities of want;  
But Womankind, that never knows a mean, 
Down to the Dregs their sinking Fortune drain:
Hourly they give, and spend, and wast, and wear:  
And think no Pleasure can be bought too dear. 
There are, who in soft Eunuchs place their Bliss; 
To shun the scrubbing of a Bearded Kiss;  
And scape Abortion; but their solid joy
Is when the Page, already past a Boy,  
Is Capond late; and to the Guelder shown 
With his two Pounders to Perfection grown.  
When all the Navel-string coud give, appears;  
All but the Beard; and thats the Barbers loss, not theirs.
Seen from afar, and famous for his ware,  
He struts into the Bath, among the Fair:  
Th admiring Crew to their Devotions fall;  
And, kneeling, on their new Priapus call.  
Kervd for his Ladys use, and with her lies;
And let him drudge for her, if thou art wise, 
Rather than trust him with thy Favrite Boy;  
He proffers Death in proffering to enjoy. 
If Songs they love, the Singers Voice they force 
Beyond his Compass till his Quail-Pipes hoarse;
His Lute and Lyre with their embrace is worn; 
With Knots they trim it, and with Gems adorn: 
Run over all the Strings, and Kiss the Case;  
And make Love to it, in the Masters place. 
A certain Lady once, of high Degree,
To Janus Vowd, and Vestas Deity,  
That Pollio might, in Singing, win the Prize;  
Pollio the Dear, the Darling of her Eyes: 
She Prayd, and Bribd; what coud she more have done 
For a Sick Husband, or an onely Son?
With her Face veild, and heaving up her hands, 
The shameless Supplaint at the Altar stands;  
The Forms of Prayr she solemnly pursues; 
And, pale with Fear, the offerd Entrails views.  
Answer, ye Powrs: For, if you heard her Vow,
Your Godships, sure, had little else to do. 
This is not all; for Actors they implore:  
An Impudence unknown to Heavn before.  
Th Aruspex, tird with this Religious Rout, 
Is forcd to stand so long, he gets the Gout.
But suffer not thy Wife abroad to roam, 
If she loves Singing, let her Sing at home; 
Not strut in Streets, with Amazonian pace;  
For thats to Cuckold thee, before thy Face.  
Their endless Itch of News comes next in play;
They vent their own; and hear what others say.  
Know what in Thrace, or what in France is done; 
Th Intrigues betwixt the Stepdam and the Son.  
Tell who Loves who, what Favours some partake:  
And who is Jilted for anothers sake.
What pregnant Widow, in what month was made;  
How oft she did, and doing, what she said.  
She, first, beholds the raging Comet rise:  
Knows whom it threatens, and what Lands destroys. 
Still for the newest News she lies in wait;
And takes Reports, just entring at the Gate. 
Wrecks, Floods, and Fires; what-ever she can meet,  
She spreads; and is the Fame of every Street. 
This is a Grievance; but the next is worse; 
A very Judgment, and her Neighbours Curse:
For, if their barking Dog disturb her ease, 
No Prayr can bind her, no Excuse appease.  
Th unmannerd Malefactor is Arraignd; 
But first the Master, who the Curr Maintaind,  
Must feel the scourge: By Night she leaves her Bed;
By Night her Bathing Equipage is led, 
That Marching Armies a less noise create; 
She moves in Tumult, and she Sweats in State. 
Mean while, her Guests their Appetites must keep; 
Some gape for Hunger, and some gasp for Sleep.
At length she comes, all flushd, but ere she sup, 
Swallows a swinging Preparation-Cup;  
And then, to clear her Stomach, spews it up.  
The Deluge-Vomit all the Floor oreflows, 
And the sour savour nauseates every Nose.
She Drinks again; again she spews a Lake; 
Her wretched Husband sees, and dares not speak: 
But mutters many a Curse, against his Wife; 
And Damns himself, for chusing such a Life. 
But of all Plagues, the greatest is untold;
The Book-Learnd Wife in Greek and Latin bold.  
The Critick-Dame, who at her Table sits:  
Homer and Virgil quotes, and weighs their Wits; 
And pities Didoes Agonizing Fits. 
She has so far th ascendant of the Board,
The Prating Pedant puts not in one Word:  
The Man of Law is Non-plust, in his Sute; 
Nay every other Female Tongue is mute.  
Hammers, and beating Anvils, you woud swear, 
And Vulcan with his whole Militia there.
Tabours and Trumpets cease; for she alone  
Is able to Redeem the labring Moon.  
Evn Wits a burthen, when it talks too long: 
But she, who has no Continence of Tongue, 
Should walk in Breeches, and shoud wear a Beard;
And mix among the Philosophick Herd.  
O what a midnight Curse has he, whose side  
Is pesterd with a Mood and Figure Bride!  
Let mine, ye Gods, (if such must be my Fate)  
No Logick Learn, nor History Translate;
But rather be a quiet, humble Fool: 
I hate a Wife, to whom I go to School,  
Who climbs the Grammar-Tree, distinctly knows 
Where Noun, and Verb, and Participle grows  
Corrects her Country Neighbour; and, a Bed,
For breaking Priscians, breaks her Husbands Head.  
The Gawdy Gossip, when shes set agog,  
In Jewels drest, and at each Ear a Bob, 
Goes flaunting out, and, in her trim of Pride,  
Thinks all she says or does, is justifid.
When Poor, shes scarce a tollerable Evil;  
But Rich, and Fine, a Wifes a very Devil.  
She duely, once a Month, renews her Face; 
Mean time, it lies in Dawb, and hid in Grease;  
Those are the Husbands Nights; she craves her due,
He takes fat Kisses, and is stuck in Glue.  
But, to the Lovd Adultrer when she steers,  
Fresh from the Bath, in brightness she appears: 
For him the Rich Arabia sweats her Gum; 
And precious Oyls from distant Indies come:
How Haggardly so ere she looks at home.  
Th Eclipse then vanishes; and all her Face 
Is opend, and restord to evry Grace, 
The Crust removd, her Cheeks as smooth as Silk,  
Are polishd with a wash of Asses Milk;
And, shoud she to the farthest North be sent,  
A train of these attend her Banishment.  
But, hadst thou seen her Plaistred up before, 
Twas so unlike a Face, it seemd a Sore. 
Tis worth our while to know what all the day
They do, and how they pass their time away, 
For, if ore-night the Husband has been slack,  
Or counterfeited Sleep, and turnd his Back,  
Next day, be sure, the Servants go to wrack.  
The Chamber-Maid and Dresser, are calld Whores;
The Page is stript, and beaten out of Doors 
The whole House suffers for the Masters Crime: 
And he himself is warnd to wake another time.  
She hires Tormentors, by the Year; she Treats 
Her Visitours, and talks; but still she beats,
Beats while she Paints her Face, surveys her Gown,  
Casts up the days Account, and still beats on:  
Tird out, at length, with an outrageous Tone,  
She bids em, in the Devils Name, begone.  
Compard with such a Proud, Insulting Dame,
Sicilian Tyrants may renounce their Name.  
For, if she hasts abroad to take the Ayr; 
Or goes to Isis Church (the Bawdy-House of Prayr)  
She hurries all her Handmaids to the Task;  
Her Head, alone, will twenty Dressers ask.
Psecas, the chief, with Breast and Shoulders bare,  
Trembling, considers every Sacred Hair; 
If any Stragler from his Rank be found, 
A pinch must, for the Mortal Sin, compound. 
Psecas is not in Fault: But, in the Glass,
The Dames Offended at her own ill Face.  
That Maid is Banishd; and another Girl  
More dextrous, manages the Comb, and Curl;  
The rest are summond, on a point so nice;  
And first, the Grave Old Woman gives Advice.
The next is calld, and so the turn goes round, 
As each for Age, or Wisdom, is Renownd:  
Such Counsel, such delibrate care they take, 
As if her Life and Honour lay at stake: 
With Curls on Curls, they build her Head before
And mount it with a Formidable Towr.  
A Gyantess she seems; but, look behind, 
And then she dwindles to the Pigmy kind.  
Duck-legd, short-wasted, such a Dwarf she is,  
That she must rise on Tip-toes for a Kiss.
Mean while, her Husbands whole Estate is spent;  
He may go bare, while she receives his Rent.  
She minds him not; she lives not as a Wife, 
But like a Bawling Neighbour, full of Strife: 
Near him, in this alone, that she extends
Her Hate to all his Servants and his Friends. 
Bellonas Priests, an Eunuch at their Head, 
About the Streets a mad Procession lead;  
The Venerable Guelding, large, and high, 
Orelooks the Herd of his inferiour Fry.
His awkward Clergy-Men about him prance;  
And beat the Timbrels to their Mystick Dance. 
Guiltless of Testicles, they tear their Throats,  
And squeak, in Treble, their Unmanly Notes. 
Mean while, his Cheeks the Myterd Prophet swells,
And Dire Presages of the Year foretels  
Unless with Eggs (his Priestly hire) they hast  
To Expiate, and avert th Autumnal blast. 
And add beside a murrey-colourd Vest, 
Which, in their places, may receive the Pest:
And, thrown into the Flood, their Crimes may bear,  
To purge th unlucky Omens of the Year. 
Th Astonisht Matrons pay, before the rest; 
That Sex is still obnoxious to the Priest.  
Through yce they beat, and plunge into the Stream,
If so the God has warnd em in a Dream.  
Weak in their Limbs, but in Devotion strong,  
On their bare Hands and Feet they crawl along 
A whole Fields length, the Laughter of the Throng.  
Should Io (Ios Priest I mean) Command
A Pilgrimage to Meroes burning Sand, 
Through Desarts they woud seek the secret Spring;  
And Holy Water, for Lustration, bring.  
How can they pay their Priests too much respect,  
Who Trade with Heavn, and Earthly Gains neglect?
With him, Domestick Gods Discourse by Night;  
By day, attended by his Quire in white, 
The Bald-pate Tribe runs madding through the Street,  
And Smile to see with how much ease they Cheat. 
The Ghostly Syre forgives the Wifes Delights,
Who Sins, through Frailty, on forbidden Nights; 
And Tempts her Husband in the Holy Time,  
When Carnal Pleasure is a Mortal Crime. 
The Sweating Image shakes its Head; but he  
With Mumbled Prayrs Attones the Deity.
The Pious Priesthood the Fat Goose receive, 
And they once Bribd the Godhead must forgive.  
No sooner these remove, but full of Fear, 
A Gypsie Jewess whispers in your Ear, 
And begs an Alms: An High-priests Daughter she,
Versd in their Talmud, and Divinity; 
And Prophesies beneath a shady Tree.  
Her Goods a Basket, and old Hay her Bed,  
She strouls, and, Telling Fortunes, gains her Bread:  
Farthings and some small Monys, are her Fees;
Yet she Interprets all your Dreams for these. 
Foretels th Estate, when the Rich Unckle Dies, 
And sees a Sweet-heart in the Sacrifice.  
Such Toys, a Pidgeons Entrails can disclose:  
Which yet th Armenian Augur far outgoes:
In Dogs, a Victim more obscene, he rakes; 
And Murderd Infants, for Inspection, takes:  
For Gain, his Impious Practice he pursues;  
For Gain, will his Accomplices accuse.  
More Credit, yet, is to Chaldeans givn;
What they foretell, is deemd the Voice of Heavn.  
Their Answers, as from Hammons Altar, come;  
Since now the Delphian Oracles are dumb.  
And Mankind, ignorant of future Fate, 
Believes what fond Astrologers relate.
Of these the most in vogue is he, who sent  
Beyond Seas, is returnd from Banishment, 
His Art who to Aspiring Otho sold; 
And sure Succession to the Crown foretold.  
For his Esteem is in his Exile placd;
The more Believd, the more he was Disgracd. 
No Astrologick Wizard Honour gains, 
Who has not oft been Banisht, or in Chains. 
He gets Renown, who, to the Halter near,  
But narrowly escapes, and buys it dear.
From him your Wife enquires the Planets Will, 
When the black Jaundies shall her Mother Kill:  
Her Sisters and her Unckles end, woud know:  
But, first, consults his Art, when you shall go.  
And, whats the greatest Gift that Heavn can give,
If, after her, th Adulterer shall live.  
She neither knows nor cares to know the rest; 
If Mars and Saturn shall the World infest; 
Or Jove and Venus with their Friendly Rays, 
Will interpose, and bring us better days.
Beware the Woman, too, and shun her Sight,  
Who in these Studies does her self Delight. 
By whom a greasie Almanack is born, 
With often handling, like chaft Amber, worn:  
Not now consulting, but consulted, she
Of the Twelve Houses, and their Lords, is free. 
She, if the Scheme a fatal Journey show,  
Stays safe at Home, but lets her Husband go.  
If but a Mile she Travel out of Town, 
The Planetary Hour must first be known,
And lucky moment; if her Eye but akes 
Or itches, its Decumbiture she takes. 
No Nourishment receives in her Disease, 
But what the Stars and Ptolomy shall please. 
The middle sort, who have not much to spare,
To Chiromancers cheaper Art repair, 
Who clap the pretty Palm, to make the Lines more fair.  
But the Rich Matron, who has more to give,  
Her Answers from the Brachman will receive:  
Skilld in the Globe and Sphere, he Gravely stands,
And, with his Compass, measures Seas and Lands. 
The Poorest of the Sex have still an Itch 
To know their Fortunes, equal to the Rich.  
The Dairy-Maid enquires, if she shall take  
The trusty Taylor, and the Cook forsake.
Yet these, tho Poor, the Pain of Child-bed bear;  
And, without Nurses, their own Infants rear:  
You seldom hear of the Rich Mantle spread 
For the Babe born in the great Ladys Bed.  
Such is the Powr of Herbs; such Arts they use
To make them Barren, or their Fruit to lose.  
But thou, whatever Slops she will have bought,  
Be thankful, and supply the deadly Draught: 
Help her to make Manslaughter; let her bleed, 
And never want for Savin at her need.
For, if she holds till her nine Months be run,  
Thou mayst be Father to an thiops Son.  
A Boy, who ready gotten to thy hands, 
By Law is to Inherit all thy Lands: 
One of that hue, that shoud he cross the way,
His Omen woud discolour all the day.  
I pass the Foundling by, a Race unknown,  
At Doors exposd, whom Matrons make their own:  
And into Noble Families advance 
A Nameless Issue, the blind work of Chance.
Indulgent Fortune does her Care employ, 
And, smiling, broods upon the Naked Boy:  
Her Garment spreads, and laps him in the Fold,  
And covers, with her Wings, from nightly Cold:  
Gives him her Blessing; puts him in a way;
Sets up the Farce, and laughs at her own Play.  
Him she promotes; she favours him alone,  
And makes Provision for him, as her own.  
The craving Wife the force of Magick tries, 
And Philters for th unable Husband buys:
The Potion works not on the part designd;  
But turns his Brain, and stupifies his Mind. 
The sotted Moon-Calf gapes, and staring on, 
Sees his own Business by another done:  
A long Oblivion, a benumning Frost,
Constrains his Head; and Yesterday is lost: 
Some nimbler Juice would make him foam, and rave, 
Like that Csonia to her Caius gave: 
Who, plucking from the Forehead of the Fole 
His Mothers Love, infusd it in the Bowl:
The boiling Blood ran hissing in his Veins, 
Till the mad Vapour mounted to his Brains.  
The Thundrer was not half so much on Fire,  
When Junos Girdle kindled his Desire.  
What Woman will not use the Poysning Trade,
When Csars Wife the Precedent has made? 
Let Agrippinas Mushroom be forgot,  
Givn to a Slavring, Old, unuseful Sot;  
That only closd the driveling Dotards Eyes, 
And sent his Godhead downward to the Skies.
But this fierce Potion calls for Fire and Sword;  
Nor spares the Commons, when it strikes the Lord: 
So many Mischiefs were in one combind; 
So much one single Poysner cost Mankind. 
If Stepdames seek their Sons in Law to kill,
Tis Venial Trespass; let them have their Will: 
But let the Child, entrusted to the Care  
Of his own Mother, of her Bread beware: 
Beware the Food she reaches with her Hand;  
The Morsel is intended for thy Land.
Thy Tutour be thy Taster, ere thou Eat;  
Theres Poyson in thy Drink, and in thy Meat. 
You think this feignd; the Satyr in a Rage 
Struts in the Buskins of the Tragick Stage, 
Forgets his Busness is to Laugh and Bite;
And will, of Deaths, and dire Revenges Write. 
Woud it were all a Fable, that you Read; 
But Drymons Wife pleads Guilty to the Deed. 
I (she confesses,) in the Fact was caught;  
Two Sons dispatching, at one deadly Draught.
What Two, Two Sons, thou Viper, in one day? 
Yes, sevn, she cries, if sevn were in my way. 
Medeas Legend is no more a Lye; 
Our Age adds Credit to Antiquity. 
Great Ills, we grant, in former times did Reign,
And Murthers then were done: but not for Gain.  
Less Admiration to great Crimes is due, 
Which they Through Wrath, or through Revenge pursue.  
For, weak of Reason, impotent of Will,  
The Sex is hurrid headlong into Ill:
And, like a Cliff from its foundations torn,  
By raging Earthquakes, into Seas is born. 
But those are Fiends, who Crimes from thought begin,  
And, cool in Mischief, meditate the Sin.  
They Read th Example of a Pious Wife,
Redeeming, with her own, her Husbands Life;  
Yet, if the Laws did that Exchange afford,  
Would save their Lapdog sooner than their Lord. 
Where ere you walk, the Belides you meet; 
And Clytemnestras grow in evry Street:
But heres the difference; Agamemnons Wife 
Was a gross Butcher, with a bloody Knife; 
But Murther, now, is to perfection grown, 
And subtle Poysons are employd alone:  
Unless some Antidote prevents their Arts,
And lines with Balsom all the Noble parts: 
In such a case, reservd for such a need, 
Rather than fail, the Dagger does the Deed.

LOOK round the Habitable World, how few 
Know their own Good; or knowing it, pursue. 
How void of Reason are our Hopes and Fears! 
What in the Conduct of our Life appears 
So well designd, so luckily begun,
But, when we have our wish, we wish undone? 
Whole Houses, of their whole Desires possest, 
Are often Ruind, at their own Request. 
In Wars, and Peace, things hurtful we require,  
When made Obnoxious to our own Desire.
With Laurels some have fatally been Crownd;  
Some who the depths of Eloquence have found,  
In that unnavigable Stream were Drownd.  
The Brawny Fool, who did his Vigour boast,  
In that Presumeing Confidence was lost:
But more have been by Avarice opprest,  
And Heaps of Money crouded in the Chest:  
Unwieldy Sums of Wealth, which higher mount 
Than Files of Marshalld Figures can account. 
To which the Stores of Crsus, in the Scale,
Woud look like little Dolphins, when they sail 
In the vast Shadow of the British Whale.  
For this, in Neros Arbitrary time, 
When Virtue was a Guilt, and Wealth a Crime,  
A Troop of Cut-Throat Guards were sent, to seize
The Rich Mens Goods, and gut their Palaces: 
The Mob, Commissiond by the Government,  
Are seldom to an Empty Garret sent. 
The Fearful Passenger, who Travels late,  
Chargd with the Carriage of a Paltry Plate,
Shakes at the Moonshine shadow of a Rush; 
And sees a Red-Coat rise from every Bush: 
The Beggar Sings, evn when he sees the place 
Beset with Thieves, and never mends his pace. 
Of all the Vows, the first and chief Request
Of each, is to be Richer than the rest: 
And yet no doubts the Poor Mans Draught controul,  
He dreads no Poison in his homely Bowl, 
Then fear the deadly Drug, when Gems Divine 
Enchase the Cup, and sparkle in the Wine.
Will you not now, the pair of Sages praise, 
Who the same End pursud, by several Ways?  
One pityd, one contemnd the Woful Times:  
One laughd at Follies, one lamented Crimes:  
Laughter is easie; but the Wonder lies,
What stores of Brine supplyd the Weepers Eyes.  
Democritus coud feed his Spleen, and shake 
His sides and shoulders till he felt em ake; 
Tho in his Country Town no Lictors were,  
Nor Rodsnor Axnor Tribune did appear;
Nor all the Foppish Gravity of show,  
Which cunning Magistrates on Crowds bestow: 
What had he done, had he beheld, on high  
Our Prtor seated, in Mock Majesty; 
His Charriot rowling ore the Dusty place
While, with dumb Pride, and a set formal Face,  
He moves, in the dull Ceremonial track, 
With Joves Embroyderd Coat upon his back: 
A Sute of Hangings had not more opprest 
His Shoulders, than that long, Laborious Vest.
A heavy Gugaw, (calld a Crown) that spred  
About his Temples, drownd his narrow Head: 
And woud have crushd it, with the Massy Freight,  
But that a sweating Slave sustaind the weight: 
A Slave in the same Chariot seen to ride,
To mortifie the mighty Madmans Pride.  
Add now th Imperial Eagle, raisd on high, 
With Golden Beak (the Mark of Majesty)  
Trumpets before, and on the Left and Right, 
A Cavalcade of Nobles, all in White:
In their own Natures false, and flattring Tribes,  
But made his Friends, by Places and by Bribes.  
In his own Age, Democritus coud find 
Sufficient cause to laugh at Humane kind: 
Learn from so great a Wit; a Land of Bogs
With Ditches fencd, a Heaven Fat with Fogs,  
May form a Spirit to sway the State;  
And make the Neighbring Monarchs fear their Fate.  
He laughs at all the Vulgar Cares and Fears;  
At their vain Triumphs, and their vainer Tears:
An equal Temper in his Mind he found, 
When Fortune flatterd him, and when she frownd. 
Tis plain from hence that what our Vows request, 
Are hurtful things, or Useless at the best. 
Some ask for Envyd Powr; which publick Hate
Pursues, and hurries headlong to their Fate:  
Down go the Titles; and the Statue Crownd, 
Is by base Hands in the next River Drownd. 
The Guiltless Horses, and the Chariot Wheel,  
The same Effects of Vulgar Fury feel:
The Smith prepares his Hammer for the Stroke, 
While the Lungd Bellows hissing Fire provoke;  
Sejanus, almost first of Roman Names, 
The great Sejanus crackles in the Flames: 
Formd in the Forge, the Pliant Brass is laid
On Anvils; and of Head and Limbs are made 
Pans, Cans, and Pispots, a whole Kitchin Trade. 
Adorn your Doors with Laurels; and a Bull 
Milk white, and large, lead to the Capitol; 
Sejanus with a Rope is dragd along,
The Sport and Laughter of the giddy Throng! 
Good Lord, they Cry, what Ethiop Lips he has, 
How foul a Snout, and what a hanging Face!  
By Heavn, I never coud endure his sight;  
But say, how came his Monstrous Crimes to Light?
What is the Charge, and who the Evidence  
(The Saviour of the Nation and the Prince?) 
Nothing of this; but our Old Csar sent 
A Noisie Letter to his Parliament:  
Nay, Sirs, if Csar writ, I ask no more,
Hes Guilty: and the Questions out of Door.  
How goes the Mob? (for thats a Mighty thing.)  
When the Kings Trump, the Mob are for the King:  
They follow Fortune, and the Common Cry 
Is still against the Rogue Condemnd to Dye.
But the same very Mob, that Rascal crowd, 
Had cryd Sejanus, with a Shout as loud;  
Had his Designs (by Fortunes favour Blest) 
Succeeded, and the Princes Age opprest,  
But long, long since, the Times have changd their Face,
The People grown Degenerate and base; 
Not sufferd now the Freedom of their choice, 
To make their Magistrates, and sell their Voice.  
Our Wise Fore-Fathers, Great by Sea and Land, 
Had once the Powr and absolute Command;
All Offices of Trust, themselves disposd;  
Raisd whom they pleasd, and whom they pleasd, Deposd. 
But we, who give our Native Rights away,  
And our Inslavd Posterity betray,  
Are now reducd to beg an Alms, and go
On Holidays to see a Puppet show. 
There was a Damnd Design, crys one, no doubt;  
For Warrants are already Issued out:  
I met Brutidius in a Mortal fright; 
Hes dipt for certain, and plays least in sight:
I fear the Rage of our offended Prince, 
Who thinks the Senate slack in his defence! 
Come let us haste, our Loyal Zeal to show,  
And spurn the Wretched Corps of Csars Foe:  
But let our Slaves be present there, lest they
Accuse their Masters, and for Gain betray.  
Such were the Whispers of those jealous Times,  
About Sejanus Punishment, and Crimes. 
Now tell me truly, woudst thou change thy Fate 
To be, like him, first Minister of State?
To have thy Levees Crowded with resort  
Of a depending, gaping, servile Court:  
Dispose all Honours of the Sword and Gown,  
Grace with a Nod, and Ruin with a Frown:  
To hold thy Prince in Pupill-Age, and sway
That Monarch, whom the Masterd World obey? 
While he, intent on secret Lusts alone, 
Lives to himself, abandoning the Throne;  
Coopt in a narrow Isle, observing Dreams  
With flattering Wisards, and erecting Schemes!
I well believe, thou woudst be Great as he; 
For every Mans a Fool to that Degree;  
All wish the dire Prerogative to kill;  
Evn they woud have the Powr, who want the Will:  
But woudst thou have thy Wishes understood,
To take the Bad together with the Good? 
Woudst thou not rather choose a small Renown,  
To be the Mayr of some poor Paltry Town, 
Bigly to Look, and Barbrously to speak;  
To pound false Weights, and scanty Measures break?
Then, grant we that Sejanus went astray,  
In evry Wish, and knew not how to pray:  
For he who graspd the Worlds exhausted Store, 
Yet never had enough, but wishd for more,  
Raisd a Top-heavy Tower, of monstrous height,
Which Mouldring, crushd him underneath the Weight.  
What did the mighty Pompeys Fall beget?  
And ruind him, who Greater than the Great, 
The stubborn Pride of Roman Nobles broke; 
And bent their Haughty Necks beneath his Yoke?
What else but his immoderate Lust of Powr, 
Prayrs made, and granted in a Luckless Hour? 
For few Usurpers to the Shades descend  
By a dry Death, or with a quiet End.  
The Boy, who scarce has paid his Entrance down
To his proud Pedant, or declind a Noun,  
(So small an Elf, that when the days are foul,  
He and his Satchel must be born to School,) 
Yet prays, and hopes, and aims at nothing less, 
To prove a Tully, or Demosthenes:
But both those Orators, so much renownd, 
In their own Depths of Eloquence were Drownd:  
The Hand and Head were never lost, of those 
Who dealt in Dogrel, or who punnd in Prose:  
Fortune foretund the dying Notes of Rome:
Till I, thy Consul sole, consold thy doom. 
His Fate had crept below the lifted Swords, 
Had all his Malice been to Murther words. 
I rather would be Mvius, Thrash for Rhimes 
Like his, the scorn and scandal of the Times,
Than that Philippique, fatally Divine,  
Which is inscribd the Second, should be Mine.  
Nor he, the Wonder of the Grecian throng, 
Who drove them with the Torrent of his Tongue,  
Who shook the Theaters, and swayd the State
Of Athens, found a more Propitious Fate.  
Whom, born beneath a boding Horoscope,  
His Sire, the Blear-Eyd Vulcan of a Shop,  
From Mars his Forge, sent to Minervas Schools, 
To learn th unlucky Art of wheedling Fools.
With Itch of Honour, and Opinion, Vain, 
All things beyond their Native worth we strain: 
The Spoils of War, brought to Feretrian Jove 
An empty Coat of Armour hung above  
The Conquerors Chariot, and in Triumph born,
A Streamer from a boarded Gally torn, 
A Chap-faln Beaver loosely hanging by 
The cloven Helm, an Arch of Victory,  
On whose high Convex sits a Captive Foe,  
And sighing casts a Mournful Look below;
Of evry Nation, each Illustrious Name, 
Such Toys as these have cheated into Fame:  
Exchanging solid Quiet, to obtain 
The Windy satisfaction of the Brain.  
So much the Thirst of Honour Fires the Blood;
So many woud be Great, so few be Good. 
For who woud Virtue for her self regard, 
Or Wed, without the Portion of Reward?  
Yet this Mad Chace of Fame, by few pursud, 
Has drawn Destruction on the Multitude:
This Avarice of Praise in Times to come,  
Those long Inscriptions, crowded on the Tomb, 
Shoud some Wild Fig-Tree take her Native bent, 
And heave below the gaudy Monument, 
Woud crack the Marble Titles, and disperse
The Characters of all the lying Verse.  
For Sepulchres themselves must crumbling fall 
In Times Abyss, the common Grave of all. 
Great Hannibal within the Ballance lay; 
And tell how many Pounds his Ashes weigh;
Whom Affrick was not able to contain, 
Whose length runs Level with th Atlantick main,  
And wearies fruitful Nilus, to convey 
His Sun-beat Waters by so long a way; 
Which Ethiopias double Clime divides,
And Elephants in other Mountains hides. 
Spain first he won, the Pyrneans past, 
And steepy Alps, the Mounds that Nature cast: 
And with Corroding Juices, as he went,  
A passage through the living Rocks he rent.
Then, like a Torrent, rowling from on high, 
He pours his head-long Rage on Italy; 
In three Victorious Battels overrun;  
Yet still uneasie, Cries, Theres nothing done,  
Till, level with the Ground, their Gates are laid;
And Punick Flags on Roman Towrs displaid.  
Ask what a Face belongd to this high Fame; 
His Picture scarcely woud deserve a Frame: 
A Sign-Post Dawber woud disdain to paint 
The one-Eyd Heroe on his Elephant.
Now whats his End, O Charming Glory, say 
What rare fifth Act, to Crown this huffing Play?  
In one deciding Battel overcome,  
He flies, is banisht from his Native home:  
Begs refuge in a Foreign Court, and there
Attends, his mean Petition to prefer; 
Repulsd by surly Grooms, who wait before 
The sleeping Tyrants interdicted Door. 
What wondrous sort of Death has Heavn designd,  
Distinguishd from the Herd of Humane Kind,
For so untamd, so turbulent a Mind!  
Nor Swords at hand, nor hissing Darts afar, 
Are doomd t Avenge the tedious bloody War,  
But Poyson, drawn through a Rings hollow plate, 
Must finish him; a sucking Infants Fate.
Go, climb the rugged Alps, Ambitious fool,  
To please the Boys, and be a Theme at School. 
One World suffisd not Alexanders Mind;  
Coopt up, he seemd in Earth and Seas confind:  
And, strugling, stretchd his restless Limbs about
The narrow Globe, to find a passage out.  
Yet, enterd in the Brick-built Town, he tryd 
The Tomb, and found the strait dimensions wide: 
"Death only this Mysterious Truth unfolds,  
"The mighty Soul, how small a Body holds.
Old Greece a Tale of Athos woud make out, 
Cut from the Continent, and Saild about; 
Seas hid with Navies, Chariots passing ore 
The Channel, on a Bridge from shore to shore. 
Rivers, whose depth no sharp beholder sees,
Drunk at an Armies Dinner, to the Lees; 
With a long Legend of Romantick things, 
Which, in his Cups, the Bowsy Poet sings. 
But how did he return, this haughty Brave 
Who whipt the Winds, and made the Sea his Slave?
(Tho Neptune took unkindly to be bound;  
And Eurus never such hard usage found 
In his Eolian Prisons under ground;)  
What God so mean, evn he who points the way,  
So Merciless a Tyrant to Obey!
But how returnd he, let us ask again?  
In a poor Skiff he passd the bloody Main,  
Choakd with the slaughterd Bodies of his Train. 
For Fame he prayd, but let th Event declare 
He had no mighty pennworth of his Prayr.
Jove, grant me length of Life, and Years good store 
Heap on my bending Back, I ask no more. 
Both Sick and Healthful, Old and Young, conspire  
In this one silly, mischievous desire.  
Mistaken Blessing, which Old Age they call,
Tis a long, nasty, darksom Hospital, 
A ropy Chain of Rhumes; a Visage rough, 
Deformd, Unfeaturd, and a Skin of Buff. 
A stitch-faln Cheek, that hangs below the Jaw; 
Such Wrinckles, as a skillful Hand woud draw
For an old Grandam Ape, when, with a Grace, 
She sits at squat, and scrubs her Leathern Face.  
In Youth, distinctions infinite abound; 
No Shape, or Feature, just alike are found; 
The Fair, the Black, the Feeble, and the Strong;
But the same foulness does to Age belong, 
The self same Palsie, both in Limbs, and Tongue.  
The Skull and Forehead one Bald Barren plain; 
And Gums unarmd to Mumble Meat in vain:  
Besides th Eternal Drivel, that supplies
The dropping Beard, from Nostrils, Mouth, and Eyes. 
His Wife and Children loath him, and, whats worse, 
Himself does his offensive Carrion Curse! 
Flattrers forsake him too; for who would kill  
Himself, to be Remembred in a Will?
His taste, not only palld to Wine and Meat,  
But to the Relish of a Nobler Treat.  
The limber Nerve, in vain provokd to rise, 
Inglorious from the Field of Battel flies:  
Poor Feeble Dotard, how coud he advance
With his Blew head-piece, and his broken Lance? 
Add, that endeavouring still without effect 
A Lust more sordid justly we suspect. 
Those Senses lost, behold a new defeat, 
The Soul, dislodging from another seat.
What Musick, or Enchanting Voice, can chear 
A Stupid, Old, Impenetrable Ear?  
No matter in what Place, or what Degree 
Of the full Theater he sits to see; 
Cornets and Trumpets cannot reach his Ear:
Under an Actors Nose hes never near.  
His Boy must bawl, to make him understand 
The Hour o th Day, or such a Lords at hand:  
The little Blood that creeps within his Veins,  
Is but just warmd in a hot Feavers pains.
In fine, he wears no Limb about him sound:  
With Sores and Sicknesses beleaguerd round:  
Ask me their Names, I sooner coud relate 
How many Drudges on Salt Hippia wait; 
What Crowds of Patients the Town Doctor kills,
Or how, last fall, he raisd the Weekly Bills.  
What Provinces by Basilus were spoild, 
What Herds of Heirs by Guardians are beguild:  
How many bouts a Day that Bitch has tryd;  
How many Boys that Pedagogue can ride!
What Lands and Lordships for their Owners know  
My Quondam Barber, but his worship now. 
This Dotard of his broken Back complains, 
One his Legs fail, and one his Shoulder pains: 
Another is of both his Eyes bereft;
And Envies who has one for Aiming left. 
A Fifth with trembling Lips expecting stands; 
As in his Child-hood, cramd by others hands; 
One, who at sight of Supper opend wide 
His Jaws before, and Whetted Grinders tryd;
Now only Yawns, and waits to be supplyd: 
Like a young Swallow, when with weary Wings 
Expected Food her fasting Mother brings.  
His loss of Members is a heavy Curse, 
But all his Faculties decayd, a worse!
His Servants Names he has forgotten quite;  
Knows not his Friend who suppd with him last Night.  
Not evn the Children, he Begot and Bred; 
Or his Will knows em not: For, in their stead, 
In Form of Law, a common Hackney Jade,
Sole Heir, for secret Services, is made:  
So lewd, and such a batterd Brothel Whore, 
That she defies all Commers, at her Door. 
Well, yet suppose his Senses are his own, 
He lives to be chief Mourner for his Son:
Before his Face his Wife and Brother burns; 
He Numbers all his Kindred in their Urns. 
These are the Fines he pays for living long;  
And dragging tedious Age, in his own wrong: 
Griefs always Green, a House-hold still in Tears,
Sad Pomps, a Threshold throngd with daily Biers;  
And Liveries of Black for Length of Years.  
Next to the Ravens Age, the Pylian King 
Was longest livd of any two legd thing; 
Blest, to Defraud the Grave so long, to Mount
His Numbred Years, and on his Right Hand Count;  
Three Hundred Seasons, guzling Must of Wine:  
But, hold a while, and hear himself Repine  
At Fates Unequal Laws; and at the Clue  
Which, Merciless in length, the midmost Sister drew.
When his Brave Son upon the Funral Pyre  
He saw extended, and his Beard on Fire; 
He turnd, and Weeping, askd his Friends, what Crime 
Had Cursd his Age to this unhappy Time?  
Thus Mournd old Peleus for Achilles slain,
And thus Ulyssess Father did complain. 
How Fortunate an End had Priam made,  
Among his Ancestors a mighty shade, 
While Troy yet stood; When Hector with the Race 
Of Royal Bastards, might his Funeral Grace:
Amidst the Tears of Trojan Dames inurnd, 
And by his Loyal Daughters truly mournd. 
Had Heaven so Blest him, he had Dyd before 
The fatal Fleet to Sparta Paris bore. 
But mark what Age producd; he livd to see
His Town in Flames, his falling Monarchy: 
In fine, the feeble Syre, reducd by Fate,  
To change his Scepter for a Sword, too late,  
His last Effort before Joves Altar tries  
A Souldier half, and half a Sacrifice:
Falls like an Oxe, that waits the coming blow;  
Old and unprofitable to the Plough. 
At least, he Dyd a Man, his Queen survivd, 
To Howl, and in a barking Body livd. 
I hasten to our own; Nor will relate
Great Mithridates, and Rich Crssus Fate; 
Whom Solon wisely Counselld to attend  
The Name of Happy, till he knew his End.  
That Marius was an Exile, that he fled, 
Was tane, in Ruind Carthage begd his Bread,
All these were owing to a Life too long:  
For whom had Rome beheld so Happy, Young! 
High in his Chariot and with Lawrel Crownd,  
When he had led the Cimbrian Captives round 
The Roman Streets; descending from his State,
In that Blest Hour he should have begd his Fate; 
Then, then, he might have dyd of all admird,  
And his Triumphant Soul with Shouts expird.  
Campania, Fortunes Malice to prevent,  
To Pompey an indulgent Feavour sent;
But publick Prayrs imposd on Heavn, to give  
Their much Lovd Leader an unkind Reprieve. 
The Cities Fate and his, conspird to save  
The Head, reservd for an Egyptian Slave. 
Cethegus, tho a Traytor to the State,
And Torturd, scapd this Ignominious Fate: 
And Sergius, who a bad Cause bravely tryd,  
All of a Piece, and undiminishd Dyd.  
To Venus, the fond Mother makes a Prayr, 
That all her Sons and Daughters may be Fair:
True, for the Boys a Mumbling Vow she sends;  
But, for the Girls, the Vaulted Temple rends: 
They must be finishd Pieces: Tis allowd  
Dianas Beauty made Latona Proud; 
And pleasd, to see the Wondring People Pray
To the New-rising Sister of the Day.  
And yet Lucretias Fate woud bar that Vow: 
And fair Virginia woud her Fate bestow  
On Rutila; and change her Faultless Make  
For the foul rumple of Her Camel back.
But, for his Mothers Boy, the Beau, what frights 
His Parents have by Day, what Anxious Nights! 
Form joind with Virtue is a sight too rare:  
Chast is no Epithete to sute with Fair. 
Suppose the same Traditionary strain
Of Rigid Manners in the House remain; 
Inveterate Truth, an Old plain Sabines Heart;  
Suppose that Nature, too, has done her part;  
Infusd into his Soul a sober Grace,  
And blusht a Modest Blood into his Face,
(For Nature is a better Guardian far, 
Than Sawcy Pedants, or dull Tutors are:)  
Yet still the Youth must nere arrive at Man; 
(So much Almighty Bribes and Presents can:) 
Evn with a Parent, where Perswasions fail,
Mony is impudent, and will prevail. 
We never Read of such a Tyrant King,  
Who guelt a boy deformd, to hear him Sing. 
Nor Nero, in his more Luxurious Rage, 
Ere made a Mistress of an ugly Page:
Sporus, his Spouse, nor Crooked was, nor Lame,  
With Mountain Back, and Belly, from the Game  
Cross-barrd: But both his Sexes well became. 
Go, boast your Springal, by his Beauty Curst  
To Ills; nor think I have declard the worst:
His Form procures him Journey-Work; a strife  
Betwixt Town-Madams and the Merchants Wife:  
Guess, when he undertakes this publick War, 
What furious Beasts offended Cuckolds are.  
Adultrers are with Dangers round beset;
Born under Mars, they cannot scape the Net; 
And from Revengeful Husbands oft have tryd 
Worse handling, than severest Laws provide: 
One stabs; one slashes; one, with Cruel Art,  
Makes Colon suffer for the Peccant part.
But your Endymion, your smooth, Smock-facd boy,  
Unrivalld, shall a Beauteous Dame enjoy: 
Not so: One more Salacious, Rich, and Old,  
Out-bids, and buys her Pleasure for her Gold: 
Now he must Moil, and Drudge, for one he loaths,
She keeps him High, in Equipage, and Cloaths: 
She Pawns her Jewels, and her Rich Attire,  
And thinks the Workman worthy of his Hire:  
In all things else immoral, stingy, mean; 
But, in her Lusts, a Conscionable Quean.
She may be handsom, yet be Chast, you say;  
Good Observator, not so fast away:  
Did it not cost the Modest Youth his Life, 
Who shund th embraces of his Fathers Wife? 
And was not tother Stripling forcd to fly,
Who, coldly, did his Patrons Queen deny, 
And pleaded Laws of Hospitality?  
The Ladies chargd em home, and turnd the Tail:  
With shame they rednd, and with spight grew Pale.  
Tis Dangrous to deny the longing Dame;
She loses Pity, who has lost her Shame. 
Now Silius wants thy Counsel, give Advice; 
Wed Csars Wife, or Dye; the Choice is nice. 
Her Comet-Eyes she darts on evry Grace;  
And takes a fatal liking to his Face.
Adornd with Bridal Pomp she sits in State; 
The Publick Notaries and Auspex wait:  
The Genial Bed is in the Garden drest:  
The Portion paid, and evry Rite expressd, 
Which in a Roman Marriage is profest.
Tis no stoln Wedding, this; rejecting awe,  
She scorns to Marry, but in Form of Law:  
In this moot case, your Judgment: To refuse 
Is present Death, besides the Night you lose. 
If you consent, tis hardly worth your pain;
A day or two of Anxious Life you gain:  
Till lowd Reports through all the Town have past, 
And reach the Prince: For Cuckolds hear the last. 
Indulge thy Pleasure, Youth, and take thy swing;  
For not to take, is but the self same thing;
Inevitable Death before thee lies;  
But looks more kindly through a Ladies Eyes.  
What then remains? Are we deprivd of Will, 
Must we not Wish, for fear of wishing Ill?  
Receive my Counsel, and securely move;
Intrust thy Fortune to the Powrs above.  
Leave them to manage for thee, and to grant 
What their unerring Wisdom sees thee want:  
In Goodness as in Greatness they excel; 
Ah that we lovd our selves but half so well!
We, blindly by our headstrong Passions led, 
Are hot for Action, and desire to Wed;  
Then wish for Heirs: But to the Gods alone  
Our future Offspring, and our Wives are known;  
Th audacious Strumpet, and ungracious Son.
Yet not to rob the Priests of pious Gain, 
That Altars be not wholly built in vain;  
Forgive the Gods the rest, and stand confind 
To Health of Body, and Content of Mind: 
A Soul, that can securely Death defie,
And count it Natures Priviledge, to Dye; 
Serene and Manly, hardend to sustain 
The load of Life, and Exercisd in Pain:  
Guiltless of Hate, and Proof against Desire;  
That all things weighs, and nothing can admire:
That dares prefer the Toils of Hercules 
To Dalliance, Banquet, and Ignoble ease.  
The Path to Peace is Virtue: What I show, 
Thy Self may freely on Thy Self bestow: 
Fortune was never Worshippd by the Wise;
But, set aloft by Fools, Usurps the Skies.

WHAT vast Prerogatives, my Gallus, are  
Accrewing to the mighty Man of War! 
For, if into a lucky Camp I light,  
Tho raw in Arms, and yet afraid to Fight, 
Befriend me, my good Stars, and all goes right:)
One Happy Hour is to a Souldier better, 
Than Mother Junos recommending Letter, 
Or Venus, when to Mars she woud prefer 
My Suit, and own the Kindness done to Her.  
See what Our Common Priviledges are:
As first no Sawcy Citizen shall dare  
To strike a Souldier, nor when struck, resent 
The wrong, for fear of farther Punishment:  
Not tho his Teeth are beaten out, his Eyes  
Hang by a String, in Bumps his Fore-head rise,
Shall He presume to mention his Disgrace, 
Or Beg amends for his demolishd Face.  
A Booted Judge shall sit to try his Cause,  
Not by the Statute, but by Martial-Laws;  
Which old Camillus orderd, to confine
The Brawls of Souldiers to the Trench and Line: 
A Wise Provision; and from thence tis clear, 
That Officers a Souldiers Cause shoud hear:  
And taking cognizance of Wrongs receivd, 
An Honest Man may hope to be relievd.
So far tis well: But with a General cry, 
The Regiment will rise in Mutiny, 
The Freedom of Their Fellow Rogue demand, 
And, if refusd, will threaten to Disband.  
Withdraw thy Action, and depart in Peace;
The Remedy is worse than the Disease: 
This Cause is worthy him, who in the Hall 
Woud for his Fee, and for his Client bawl: 
But woudst Thou Friend who hast two Legs alone,  
(Which Heavn be praisd, Thou yet mayst call Thy own,)
Woudst Thou to run the Gauntlet these expose 
To a whole Company of Hob-naild Shoos? 
Sure the good Breeding of Wise Citizens 
Shoud teach em more good Nature to their Shins. 
Besides, whom canst Thou think so much thy Friend,
Who dares appear thy Business to defend?  
Dry up thy Tears, and Pocket up th Abuse,  
Nor put thy Friend to make a bad excuse:  
The Judge cries out, Your Evidence produce. 
Will He, who saw the Souldiers Mutton Fist,
And saw Thee mauld, appear within the List;  
To witness Truth? When I see one so Brave,  
The Dead, think I, are risen from the Grave;  
And with their long Spade Beards and Matted Hair, 
Our honest Ancestors are come to take the Air.
Against a Clown, with more security,  
A Witness may be brought to swear a Lye,  
Than, tho his Evidence be Full and Fair,  
To vouch a Truth against a Man of War.  
More Benefits remain, and claimd as Rights,
Which are a standing Armics Perquisites.  
If any Rogue vexatious Suits advance  
Against me for my known Inheritance,  
Enter by Violence my Fruitful Grounds,  
Or take the Sacred Land-Mark from my Bounds,
Those Bounds which with Procession and with Prayr, 
And Offerd Cakes, have been my Annual care:  
Or if my Debtors do not keep their day, 
Deny their Hands, and then refuse to pay; 
I must with Patience all the Terms attend,
Among the common Causes that depend 
Till mine is calld; and that long lookd for day 
Is still encumberd with some new delay:  
Perhaps the Cloath of State is only spred,  
Some of the Quorum may be Sick a Bed;
That Judge is Hot, and doffs his Gown, while this  
Ore night was Bowsy, and goes out to Piss: 
So many Rubs appear, the time is gone 
For hearing, and the tedious Suit goes on:  
But Buff, and Belt-Men never know these Cares,
No Time, nor Trick of Law, their Action Bars: 
Their Cause They to an easier Issue put:  
They will be heard, or They lug out, and cut. 
Another Branch of their Revenue still 
Remains beyond their boundless Right to kill,
Their Father yet alive, impowrd to make a Will. 
For, what their Prowess Gaind, the Law declares  
Is to themselves alone, and to their Heirs: 
No share of that goes back to the begettor, 
But if the Son fights well, and Plunders better,
Like stout Coranus, his old shaking Sire  
Does a Remembrance in his Will desire:  
Inquisitive of Fights, and longs in vain  
To find him in the Number of the Slain: 
But still he lives, and rising by the War,
Enjoyes his Gains, and has enough to spare: 
For tis a Noble Generals prudent part 
To cherish Valour, and reward Desert: 
Let him be dawbd with Lace, live High, and Whore;  
Sometimes be Lowzy, but be never Poor.

**
The First Book of Homer's Iliad
***

THE WRATH of Peleus Son, O Muse, resound; 
Whose dire Effects the Grecian Army found:  
And many a Heroe, King, and hardy Knight, 
Were sent, in early Youth, to Shades of Night:  
Their Limbs a Prey to Dogs and Vultures made;
So was the Sovreign Will of Jove obeyd: 
From that ill-omend Hour when Strife begun,  
Betwixt Atrides Great, and Thetis God-like Son. 
What Powr provokd, and for what Cause, relate,  
Sowd, in their Breasts, the Seeds of stern Debate:
Joves and Latonas Son his Wrath expressd,  
In Vengeance of his violated Priest,  
Against the King of Men; who swoln with Pride.  
Refusd his Presents, and his Prayrs denyd. 
For this the God a swift Contagion spread
Amid the Camp, where Heaps on Heaps lay dead. 
For Venerable Chryses came to buy,  
With Gold and Gifts of Price, his Daughters Liberty. 
Suppliant before the Grecian chiefs he stood; 
Awful, and armd with Ensigns of his God:
Bare was his hoary Head; one holy Hand  
Held forth his Laurel Crown, and one his Sceptre of Command.  
His Suit was common; but above the rest,  
To both the Brother-Princes thus addressd: 
Ye Sons of Atreus, and ye Grecian Powrs,
So may the Gods who dwell in Heavnly Bowrs  
Succeed your Siege, accord the Vows you make, 
And give you Troys Imperial Town to take; 
So, by their happy Conduct, may you come  
With Conquest back to your sweet Native Home;
As you receive the Ransom which I bring,  
(Respecting love, and the far-shooting King,) 
And break my Daughters Bonds, at my desire; 
And glad with her Return her grieving Sire. 
With Shouts of loud Acclaim the Greeks decree
To take the Gifts, to set the Damsel free.  
The King of Men alone with Fury burnd; 
And haughty, these opprobrious Words returnd:  
Hence, Holy Dotard, and avoid my Sight, 
Er Evil intercept thy tardy Flight:
Nor dare to tread this interdicted Strand,  
Lest not that idle Sceptre in thy Hand, 
Nor thy Gods Crown, my vowd Revenge withstand.  
Hence on thy Life: The Captive-Maid is mine;  
Whom not for Price or Prayrs I will resign:
Mine she shall be, till creeping Age and Time 
Her Bloom have witherd, and consumd her Prime:  
Till then my Royal Bed she shall attend;  
And having first adornd it, late ascend: 
This, for the Night; by Day, the Web and Loom
And homely Household-task, shall be her Doom, 
Far from thy lovd Embrace, and her sweet Native Home.  
He said: The helpless Priest replyd no more, 
But sped his Steps along the hoarse-resounding Shore: 
Silent he fled; secure at length he stood,
Devoutly cursd his Foes, and thus invokd his God. 
O Source of Sacred Light, attend my Prayr, 
God with the Silver Bow, and Golden Hair; 
Whom Chrysa, Cilla, Tenedos obeys,  
And whose broad Eye their happy Soil surveys;
If, Smintheus, I have pourd before thy Shrine  
The Blood of Oxen, Goats, and ruddy Wine, 
And Larded Thighs on loaded Altars laid,  
Hear, and my just Revenge propitious aid, 
Pierce the proud Greeks, and with thy Shafts attest
How much thy powr is injured in thy Priest.  
He prayd, and Phbus hearing, urgd his Flight,  
With fury kindled, from Olympus Height; 
His Quiver oer his ample Shoulders threw;  
His Bow twangd, and his Arrows rattld as they flew.
Black as a stormy Night, he rangd around 
The Tents, and compassd the devoted Ground.  
Then with full Force his deadly Bowe he bent, 
And Featherd Fates among the Mules and Sumpters sent,  
Th Essay of Rage, on faithful Dogs the next;
And last, in Humane Hearts his Arrows fixd.  
The God nine Days the Greeks at Rovers killd,  
Nine Days the Camp with Funral Fires was filld; 
The tenth, Achilles, by the Queens Command, 
Who bears Heavns awful Sceptre in her Hand,
A Council summond: for the Goddess grievd 
Her favourd Hoast shoud perish unrelievd.  
The Kings assembled, soon their Chief inclose;  
Then from his Seat the Goddess-born arose,  
And thus undaunted spoke: What now remains,
But that once more we tempt the watry Plains, 
And wandring homeward, seek our Safety hence, 
In Flight at least if we can find Defence?  
Such Woes at once encompass us about, 
The Plague within the Camp, the Sword without.
Consult, O King, the Prophets of th Event: 
And whence these Ills, and what the Gods intent,  
Let them by Dreams explore; for Dreams from Jove are sent.  
What want of offerd Victims, what Offence  
In Fact committed coud the Sun incense,
To deal his deadly Shafts? What may remove  
His settled Hate, and reconcile his Love? 
That he may look propitious on our Toils; 
And hungry Graves no more be glutted with our Spoils. 
Thus to the King of Men the Hero spoke,
Then Calchas the desird Occasion took: 
Calchas the sacred Seer, who had in view  
Things present and the past; and Things to come foreknew, 
Supream of Augurs, who by Phbus taught,  
The Grecian Powrs to Troys Destruction brought.
Skilld in the secret Causes of their Woes, 
The Reverend Priest in graceful Act arose:  
And thus bespoke Pelides: Care of Jove, 
Favourd of all th Immortal Powrs above;  
Woudst thou the Seeds deep sown of Mischief know,
And why, provokd Apollo bends his bow? 
Plight first thy Faith, inviolably true,  
To save me from those Ills, that may ensue. 
For I shall tell ungrateful Truths, to those  
Whose boundless Powrs of Life and Death dispose.
And Sovreigns, ever jealous of their State,  
Forgive not those whom once they mark for Hate; 
Evn tho th Offence they seemingly digest,  
Revenge, like Embers, rakd within their Breast,  
Bursts forth in Flames; whose unresisted Powr
Will seize th unwary Wretch, and soon devour.  
Such, and no less is he, on whom depends  
The sum of Things; and whom my Tongue of force offends. 
Secure me then from his foreseen Intent,  
That what his Wrath may doom, thy Valour may prevent.
To this the stern Achilles made Reply:  
Be bold; and on my plighted Faith rely, 
To speak what Phbus has inspird thy Soul  
For common Good; and speak without controul.  
His Godhead I invoke, by him I swear,
That while my Nostrils draw this vital Air, 
None shall presume to violate those Bands;  
Or touch thy Person with unhallowd Hands:  
Evn not the King of Men that all commands. 
At this, resuming Heart, the Prophet said:
Nor Hecatombs unslain, nor Vows unpaid, 
On Greeks, accursd, this dire Contagion bring; 
Or call for Vengeance from the Bowyer King; 
But he the Tyrant, whom none dares resist,  
Affronts the Godhead in his injurd Priest:
He keeps the Damsel Captive in his Chain, 
And Presents are refusd, and Prayrs preferrd in vain.  
For this th avenging Powr employs his Darts;  
And empties all his Quiver in our Hearts: 
Thus will persist, relentless in his ire,
Till the fair Slave be renderd to her Syre:  
And Ransom-free restord to his Abode,  
With Sacrifice to reconcile the God:  
Then he, perhaps, attond by Prayr, may cease  
His Vengeance justly vowd, and give the Peace.
Thus having said, he sate: Thus answerd then 
Upstarting from his Throne, the King of Men,  
His Breast with Fury filld, his Eyes with Fire;  
Which rowling round, he shot in Sparkles on the Sire: 
Augur of Ill, whose Tongue was never found
Without a Priestly Curse or boding Sound; 
For not one blessd Event foretold to me  
Passd through that Mouth, or passd unwillingly. 
And now thou dost with Lies the Throne invade,  
By Practice hardend in thy slandring Trade.
Obtending Heavn, for what eer Ills befal; 
And sputtring under specious Names thy Gall.  
Now Phbus is provokd; his Rites and Laws  
Are in his Priest profand, and I the Cause:  
Since I detain a Slave, my Sovreign Prize;
And sacred Gold, your Idol-God, despise.  
I love her well: And well her Merits claim, 
To stand preferrd before my Grecian Dame:  
Not Clytemnestras self in Beauties Bloom 
More charmd, or better plyd the various Loom:
Mine is the Maid; and brought in happy Hour 
With every Household-grace adornd, to bless my Nuptial Bowr.  
Yet shall she be restord; since publick Good 
For private Intrest ought not to be withstood, 
To save th Effusion of my Peoples Blood.
But Right requires, if I resign my own, 
I shoud not suffer for your sakes alone; 
Alone excluded from the Prize I gaind, 
And by your common Suffrage have obtaind 
The Slave without a Ransom shall be sent:
It rests for you to make th Equivalent.  
To this the fierce Thessalian Prince replyd: 
O first in Powr, but passing all in Pride, 
Griping, and still tenacious of thy Hold, 
Wouldst thou the Grecian Chiefs, though largely Sould,
Shoud give the Prizes they had gaind before,  
And with their Loss thy Sacrilege restore?  
Whateer by force of Arms the Soldier got,  
Is each his own, by dividend of Lot:  
Which to resume, were both unjust, and base;
Not to be borne but by a servile Race.  
But this we can: If Saturns Son bestows  
The Sack of Troy, which he by Promise owes; 
Then shall the conquering Greeks thy Loss restore,  
And with large Intrest make th advantage more.
To this Atrides answerd, Though thy Boast  
Assumes the foremost Name of all our Host,  
Pretend not, mighty Man, that what is mine, 
Controlld by thee, I tamely shoud resign. 
Shall I release the Prize I gaind by Right,
In taken Towns, and many a bloody Fight,  
While thou detainst Briseis in thy Bands,  
By priestly glossing on the Gods Commands? 
Resolve on this, (a short Alternative)  
Quit mine, or, in Exchange, another give;
Else I, assure thy Soul, by Sovreign Right 
Will seize thy Captive in thy own Despight. 
Or from stout Ajax, or Ulysses, bear  
What other Prize my Fancy shall prefer: 
Then softly murmur, or aloud complain,
Rage as you please, you shall resist in vain. 
But more of this, in proper Time and Place; 
To Things of greater Moment let us pass.  
A Ship to sail the sacred Seas prepare; 
Proud in her Trim; and put on board the Fair,
With Sacrifice and Gifts, and all the Pomp of Prayr. 
The Crew well chosen, the Command shall be  
In Ajax; or if other I decree,  
In Cretas King, or Ithacus, or, if I please in Thee: 
Most fit thy self to see performd th Intent
From which my Prisner from my Sight is sent; 
(Thanks to thy pious Care) that Phbus may relent.  
At this, Achilles rould his furious Eyes,  
Fixd on the King askant; and thus replies: 
O, Impudent, regardful of thy own,
Whose thoughts are centerd on thy self alone,  
Advancd to Sovereign Sway, for better Ends 
Than thus like abject Slaves to treat thy Friends.  
What Greek is he, that urgd by thy Command,  
Against the Trojan Troops will lift his Hand?
Not I: Nor such inforcd Respect I owe; 
Nor Pergamus I hate, nor Priam is my Foe. 
What Wrong from Troy remote, coud I sustain, 
To leave my fruitful Soil, and happy Reign, 
And plough the Surges of the stormy Main?
Thee, frontless Man, we followd from afar; 
Thy Instruments of Death, and Tools of War. 
Thine is the Triumph; ours the Toil alone:  
We bear thee on our Backs, and mount thee on the Throne.  
For thee we fall in Fight; for thee redress
Thy baffled Brother; not the Wrongs of Greece.  
And now thou threatenst with unjust Decree,  
To punish thy affronting Heavn, on me. 
To seize the Prize which I so dearly bought;  
By common Suffrage givn, confirmd by Lot.
Mean Match to thine: For still above the rest,  
Thy hookd rapacious Hands usurp the best.  
Though mine are first in Fight, to force the Prey;  
And last sustain the Labours of the Day.  
Nor grudge I thee the much the Grecians give;
Nor murmring take the little I receive.  
Yet evn this little, thou, who woudst ingross 
The whole, Insatiate, envyst as thy Loss.  
Know, then, for Phthya fixd is my return:  
Better at home my ill-paid Pains to mourn,
Than from an Equal here sustain the publick Scorn.  
The King, whose Brows with shining Gold were bound, 
Who saw his Throne with scepterd Slaves encompassd round, 
Thus answerd stern: Go, at thy Pleasure, go: 
We need not such a Friend, nor fear we such a Foe.
There will not want to follow me in Fight:  
Jove will assist, and Jove assert my Right. 
But thou of all the Kings, (his Care below) 
Art least at my Command, and most my Foe. 
Debates, Dissentions, Uproars are thy Joy;
Provokd without Offence, and practisd to destroy. 
Strength is of Brutes; and not thy Boast alone; 
At least tis lent from Heavn; and not thy own.  
Fly then, ill-mannerd, to thy Native Land, 
And there, thy Ant-born Myrmidons command.
But mark this Menace; since I must resign 
My black-eyd Maid, to please the Powrs divine:  
(A well-riggd Vessel in the Port attends,  
Mannd at my Charge, commanded by my Friends) 
The Ship shall waft her to her wishd Abode,
Full fraught with holy Bribes to the far-shooting God.  
This thus dispatchd, I owe my self the Care, 
My Fame and injurd Honour to repair: 
From thy own Tent, proud Man, in thy despight,  
This Hand shall ravish thy pretended Right.
Briseis shall be mine, and thou shalt see,  
What odds of awful Powr I have on thee:  
That others at thy cost may learn the diffrence of degree. 
At this th Impatient Hero sowrly smild. 
His Heart, impetuous in his Bosom boild,
And justled by two Tides of equal sway, 
Stood, for a while, suspended in his way. 
Betwixt his Reason and his Rage untamd;  
One whisperd soft, and one aloud reclaimd:  
That only counselld to the safer side;
This to the Sword his ready Hand applyd. 
Unpunishd to support th Affront was hard: 
Nor easy was th Attempt to force the Guard.  
But soon the Thirst of Vengeance fird his Blood: 
Half shone his Faulchion, and half sheathd it stood.
In that nice Moment, Pallas, from above,  
Commissiond by th Imperial Wife of Jove,  
Descended swift: (the white-armd Queen was loath 
The Fight shoud follow; for she favourd both:)  
Just as in Act he stood, in Clouds inshrind,
Her Hand she fastend on his Hair behind; 
Then backward by his yellow Curls she drew; 
To him and him alone confessd in view. 
Tamd by superiour Force, he turnd his Eyes  
Aghast at first, and stupid with Surprize:
But by her sparkling Eyes, and ardent Look, 
The Virgin-Warrior known, he thus bespoke.  
Comst thou, Celestial, to behold my Wrongs?  
Then view the Vengeance which to Crimes belongs.  
Thus He. The blue-eyd Goddess thus rejoind:
I come to calm thy turbulence of Mind,  
If Reason will resume her soveraign Sway, 
And, sent by Juno, her Commands obey. 
Equal she loves you both, and I protect:  
Then give thy Guardian Gods their due respect;
And cease Contention; be thy Words severe,  
Sharp as he merits: But the Sword forbear.  
An Hour unhopd already wings her way,  
When he his dire Affront shall dearly pay:  
When the proud King shall sue, with trebble Gain,
To quit thy Loss, and conquer thy Disdain.  
But thou, secure of my unfailing Word,  
Compose thy swelling Soul; and sheath the Sword.  
The Youth thus answerd mild; Auspicious Maid,  
Heavens will be mine, and your Commands obeyd.
The Gods are just, and when subduing Sense, 
We serve their Powrs, provide the Recompence.  
He said; with surly Faith believd her Word,  
And, in the Sheath, reluctant, plungd the Sword. 
Her Message done, she mounts the blessd Abodes,
And mixd among the Senate of the Gods. 
At her Departure his Disdain returnd:  
The Fire she fand, with greater Fury burnd; 
Rumbling within till thus it found a Vent:  
Dastard, and Drunkard, Mean and Insolent:
Tongue-valiant Hero, Vaunter of thy Might,  
In Threats the foremost, but the lag in Fight;  
When didst thou thrust amid the mingled Preace,  
Content to bid the War aloof in Peace?  
Arms are the Trade of each Plebeyan soul;
Tis Death to fight; but Kingly to controul.  
Lord-like at ease, with arbitrary Powr,  
To peel the Chiefs, the People to devour. 
These, Traitor, are thy Tallents; safer far 
Than to contend in Fields, and Toils of War.
Nor coudst thou thus have dard the common Hate, 
Were not their Souls as abject as their State.  
But, by this Scepter, solemnly I swear, 
(Which never more green Leaf or growing Branch shall bear:  
Torn from the Tree, and givn by Jove to those
Who Laws dispence and mighty Wrongs oppose) 
That when the Grecians want my wonted Aid,  
No Gift shall bribe it, and no Prayr persuade. 
When Hector comes, the Homicide, to wield 
His conquering Arms, with Corps to strow the Field,
Then shalt thou mourn thy Pride; and late confess 
My Wrong repented, when tis past Redress.  
He said: And with Disdain, in open view,  
Against the Ground his golden Scepter threw;  
Then sate: with boiling Rage Atrides burnd:
And Foam betwixt his gnashing Grinders churnd. 
But from his Seat the Pylian Prince arose,  
With Reasning mild, their Madness to compose:  
Words, sweet as Hony, from his Mouth distilld; 
Two Centuries already he fulfilld;
And now began the third; unbroken yet:  
Once famd for Courage; still in Council great. 
What worse, he said, can Argos undergo, 
What can more gratify the Phrygian Foe, 
Than these distemperd Heats? If both the Lights
Of Greece their private Intrest disunites! 
Believe a Friend, with thrice your Years increasd, 
And let these youthful Passions be repressd: 
I flourishd long before your Birth; and then 
Livd equal with a Race of braver Men,
Than these dim Eyes shall eer behold agen. 
Ceneus and Dryas, and, excelling them,  
Great Theseus, and the Force of greater Polypheme.  
With these I went, a Brother of the War,  
Their Dangers to divide; their Fame to share.
Nor idle stood with unassisting Hands,  
When salvage Beasts, and Mens more salvage Bands,  
Their virtuous Toil subdued: yet those I swayd,  
With powrful Speech: I spoke, and they obeyd. 
If such as those, my Councils coud reclaim,
Think not, young Warriors, your diminishd Name 
Shall lose of Lustre, by subjecting Rage  
To the cool Dictates of experiencd Age.  
Thou, King of Men, stretch not thy sovereign Sway 
Beyond the Bounds free Subjects can obey:
But let Pelides in his Prize rejoice, 
Atchievd in arms, allowd by publick Voice.  
Nor Thou, brave Champion, with his Powr contend, 
Before whose Throne evn Kings their lowerd Scepters bend. 
The Head of Action He, and Thou the Hand,
Matchless thy Force; but mightier his Command:  
Thou first, O king, release the rights of Sway; 
Powr, self-restraind, the People best obey. 
Sanctions of Law from Thee derive their Source; 
Command thy Self, whom no Commands can force.
The Son of Thetis Rampire of our Host,  
Is worth our Care to keep; nor shall my Prayrs be lost.  
Thus Nestor said, and ceasd: Atrides broke 
His Silence next; but ponderd eer he spoke. 
Wise are thy Words, and glad I would obey,
But this proud Man affects Imperial Sway. 
Controlling Kings, and trampling on our State 
His Will is Law; and what he wills is Fate. 
The Gods have givn him Strength: But whence the Style, 
Of lawless Powr assumd, or Licence to revile?
Achilles cut him short; and thus replyd: 
My Worth allowd in Words, is in effect denyd. 
For who but a Poltron, possessd with Fear, 
Such haughty Insolence can tamely bear? 
Command thy Slaves: My freeborn Soul disdains
A Tyrants Curb; and restiff breaks the Reins.  
Take this along; that no Dispute shall rise 
(Though mine the Woman) for my ravishd Prize:  
But, she excepted, as unworthy Strife,  
Dare not, I charge thee dare not, on thy Life,
Touch ought of mine beside, by Lot my due,  
But stand aloof, and think profane to view: 
This Fauchion, else, not hitherto withstood,  
These hostile Fields shall fatten with thy Blood. 
He said; and rose the first: the Council broke;
And all their grave Consults dissolvd in Smoke.  
The Royal Youth retird, on Vengeance bent, 
Patroclus followd silent to his Tent.  
Mean time, the King with Gifts a Vessel stores; 
Supplies the Banks with twenty chosen Oars:
And next, to reconcile the shooter God, 
Within her hollow Sides the Sacrifice he stowd:  
Chryseis last was set on board; whose Hand  
Ulysses took, intrusted with Command; 
They plow the liquid Seas; and leave the lessning Land.
Atrides then his outward Zeal to boast, 
Bade purify the Sin-polluted Host.  
With perfect Hecatombs the God they gracd; 
Whose offerd Entrails in the Main were cast. 
Black Bulls, and bearded Goats on Altars lie;
And clouds of savry stench involve the Sky.  
These Pomps the Royal Hypocrite designd  
For Shew: But harbourd Vengeance in his Mind:  
Till holy Malice, longing for a Vent, 
At length, discoverd his conceald Intent.
Talthybius, and Eurybates the just, 
Heralds of Arms, and Ministers of Trust,  
He calld; and thus bespoke: Haste hence your way;  
And from the Goddess-born demand his Prey.  
If yielded, bring the Captive: If denyd,
The King (so tell him) shall chastise his Pride:  
And with armd Multitudes in Person come  
To vindicate his Powr, and justify his Doom. 
This hard Command unwilling they obey,  
And oer the barren Shore pursue their way,
Where quarterd in their Camp, the fierce Thessalians lay.  
Their Sovreign seated on his Chair, they find; 
His pensive Cheek upon his Hand reclind, 
And anxious Thoughts revolving in his Mind. 
With gloomy Looks he saw them entring in
Without Salute: Nor durst they first begin, 
Fearful of rash Offence and Death foreseen. 
He soon the Cause divining, cleard his Brow; 
And thus did liberty of Speech allow. 
Interpreters of Gods and Men, be bold
Awful your Character, and uncontrolld: 
Howeer unpleasing be the News you bring, 
I blame not you, but your Imperious King. 
You come, I know, my Captive to demand; 
Patroclus, give her to the Heralds Hand.
But you, authentick Witnesses I bring,  
Before the Gods, and your ungrateful King,  
Of this my Manifest: That never more  
This Hand shall combate on the crooked Shore: 
No, let the Grecian Powrs oppressd in Fight,
Unpityd perish in their Tyrants Sight. 
Blind of the future, and by Rage misled,  
He pulls his Crimes upon his Peoples Head  
Forcd from the Field in Trenches to contend, 
And his Insulted Camp from foes defend.
He said, and soon, obeying his Intent,  
Patroclus brought Briseis from her Tent;  
Then to th intrusted Messengers resignd:  
She wept, and often cast her Eyes behind; 
Forcd from the Man she lovd: They led her thence,
Along the Shore a Prisner to their Prince. 
Sole on the barren Sands the suffring Chief  
Roard out for Anguish, and indulgd his Grief; 
Cast on his Kindred Seas a stormy Look, 
And his upbraided Mother thus bespoke.
Unhappy Parent of a short-livd Son,  
Since Jove in Pity by thy Prayrs was won 
To grace my small Remains of Breath with Fame,  
Why loads he this imbitterd Life with Shame? 
Suffring his King of Men to force my Slave,
Whom well deservd in War, the Grecians gave. 
Set by old Oceans side the Goddess heard;  
Then from the sacred Deep her Head she reard:  
Rose like a Morning-mist; and thus begun  
To soothe the Sorrows of her plaintive Son.
Why crys my Care, and why conceals his Smart?  
Let thy afflicted Parent share her part.  
Then sighing from the bottom of his Breast, 
To the Sea-Goddess thus the Goddess-born addressd. 
Thou knowst my Pain, which telling but recals:
By Force of Arms we razd the Theban Walls; 
The ransackd City, taken by our Toils, 
We left, and hither brought the golden Spoils;  
Equal we shard them; but before the rest,  
The proud Prerogative had seizd the best.
Chryseis was the greedy Tyrants Prize, 
Chryseis, rosy-cheekd, with charming Eyes. 
Her Syre, Apollos Priest, arrivd to buy 
With profferd Gifts of Price, his Daughters Liberty.  
Suppliant before the Grecians Chiefs he stood,
Awful, and armd with Ensigns of his God: 
Bare was his hoary Head, one holy Hand  
Held forth his Lawrel-Crown, and one, his Scepter of Command. 
His suit was common, but above the rest 
To both the Brother-Princes was addressd.
With Shouts of loud Acclaim the Greeks agree  
To take the Gifts, to set the Prisner free.  
Not so the Tyrant, who with scorn the Priest  
Receivd, and with opprobrious Words dismissd. 
The good old Man, forlorn of human Aid,
For Vengeance to his heavnly Patron prayd:  
The Godhead gave a favourable Ear,  
And granted all to him he held so dear; 
In an ill Hour his piercing Shafts he sped; 
And Heaps on Heaps of slaughterd Greeks lay dead,
While round the Camp he rangd: At length arose 
A Seer who well divind; and durst disclose 
The Source of all our Ills: I took the Word;  
And urgd the sacred Slave to be restord,  
The God appeasd: The swelling Monarch stormd:
And then the Vengeance vowd, he since performd: 
The Greeks tis true, their Ruin to prevent, 
Have to the Royal Priest his Daughter sent; 
But from their haughty King his Heralds came, 
And seizd by his command, my Captive Dame,
By common Suffrage given; but, thou, be won,  
If in thy Powr, t avenge thy injurd Son: 
Ascend the Skies; and supplicating move 
Thy just Complaint to Cloud-compelling Jove.  
If thou by either Word or Deed hast wrought
A kind remembrance in his grateful Thought, 
Urge him by that: For often hast thou said  
Thy Powr was once not useless in his Aid,  
When He who high above the Highest reigns,  
Surprizd by Traytor-Gods, was bound in Chains.
When Juno, Pallas, with Ambition fird, 
And his blue Brother of the Seas conspird, 
Thou freedst the Soveraign from unworthy Bands,  
Thou broughtst Briareus with his hundred Hands,  
(So calld in Heavn, but mortal Men below
By his terrestrial Name, geon know:  
Twice stronger than his Syre, who sate above  
Assessor to the Throne of thundring Jove.)  
The Gods, dismayd at his approach, withdrew, 
Nor durst their unaccomplishd Crime pursue.
That Action to his grateful Mind recal: 
Embrace his Knees, and at his Footstool fall: 
That now if ever, he will aid our Foes; 
Let Troys triumphant Troops the Camp inclose:  
Ours beaten to the Shore, the Siege forsake;
And what their King deserves with him partake;  
That the proud Tyrant at his proper Cost, 
May learn the Value of the Man he lost. 
To whom the Mother-Goddess thus replyd,  
Sighd ere she spoke, and while she spoke she cryd,
Ah wretched me! by Fates averse decreed 
To bring thee forth with Pain, with care to breed!  
Did envious Heavn not otherwise ordain,  
Safe in thy hollow Ships thou shoudst remain; 
Nor ever tempt the fatal Field again.
But now thy Planet sheds his poisnous Rays:  
And short, and full of Sorrow are thy Days. 
For what remains, to Heavn I will ascend,  
And at the Thundrers Throne thy Suit commend. 
Till then, secure in Ships, abstain from Fight;
Indulge thy Grief in Tears, and vent thy Spight.  
For yesterday the Court of Heavn with Jove 
Removd: Tis dead Vacation now above.  
Twelve Days the Gods their solemn Revels keep,  
And quaff with blameless Ethiops in the Deep.
Returnd from thence, to Heavn my Flight I take, 
Knock at the brazen Gates, and Providence awake,  
Embrace his Knees, and suppliant to the Sire, 
Doubt not I will obtain the grant of thy desire.  
She said: And parting left him on the place,
Swoln with Disdain, resenting his Disgrace: 
Revengeful Thoughts revolving in his Mind,  
He wept for Anger and for Love he pind.  
Mean time with prosperous Gales, Ulysses brought  
The Slave, and Ship with Sacrifices fraught,
To Chrysas Port: Where entring with the Tide,  
He dropd his Anchors, and his Oars he plyd. 
Furld every Sail, and drawing down the Mast, 
His Vessel moord; and made with Haulsers fast. 
Descending on the Plain, ashore they bring
The Hecatomb to please the shooter King.  
The Dame before an Altars holy Fire 
Ulysses led; and thus bespoke her Sire. 
Reverencd be thou, and be thy God adord:  
The King of Men thy Daughter has restord;
And sent by me with Presents and with Prayr; 
He recommends him to thy pious Care;  
That Phbus at thy Sute his Wrath may cease,  
And give the penitent Offenders Peace.  
He said, and gave her to her Fathers Hands,
Who glad receivd her, free from servile Bands. 
This done, in Order they with sober Grace,  
Their gifts around the well-built Altar place.  
Then washd, and took the Cakes; while Chryses stood  
With Hands upheld, and thus invokd his God.
God of the Silver Bow, whose Eyes survey  
The sacred Cilla, thou whose awful Sway,  
Chrysa the blessd, and Tenedos obey: 
Now hear, as thou before my Prayr hast heard,  
Against the Grecians, and their Prince, preferrd:
Once thou hast honourd, honour once again  
Thy Priest; nor let his second Vows be vain;  
But from th afflicted Host and humbled Prince  
Avert thy Wrath, and cease thy Pestilence.  
Apollo heard, and, conquering his Disdain,
Unbent his Bow and Greece respird again. 
Now when the solemn Rites of Prayr were past,  
Their salted Cakes on crackling Flames they cast. 
Then, turning back, the Sacrifice they sped:  
The fatted Oxen slew, and flead the Dead,
Choppd off their nervous Thighs, and next prepard 
T involve the lean in Cauls, and mend with Lard. 
Sweet-breads and Collops were with Skewers prickd  
About the Sides; inbibing what they deckd. 
The Priest with holy Hands was seen to tine
The cloven Wood, and pour the ruddy Wine, 
The Youth approachd the Fire, and as it burnd 
On five sharp Broachers rankd, the Roast they turnd;  
These Morsels stayd their stomachs; then the rest  
They cut in Legs and Fillets for the Feast;
Which drawn and servd, their Hunger they appease 
With savry Meat, and set their Minds at ease.  
Now when the rage of Eating was repelld, 
The Boys with generous Wine the Goblets filld. 
The first Libations to the Gods they pour:
And then with Songs indulge the Genial Hour,  
Holy Debauch! till Day to Night they bring, 
With Hymns and Pans to the Bowyer King.  
At Sun-set to their Ship they make return,  
And snore secure on Decks, till rosy Morn.
The Skies with dawning Day were purpled oer; 
Awakd, with labring Oars they leave the Shore:  
The Powr appeasd, with Winds sufficd the Sail, 
The bellying Canvass strutted with the Gale;  
The Waves indignant roar with surly Pride,
And press against the Sides, and beaten off divide. 
They cut the foamy way, with Force impelld 
Superiour, till the Trojan Port they held:  
Then hauling on the Strand, their Gally moor, 
And pitch their Tents along the crooked Shore.
Mean time the Goddess-born in secret pind; 
Nor visited the Camp, nor in the Council joind,  
But, keeping close, his gnawing Heart he fed  
With Hopes of Vengeance on the Tyrants Head: 
And wishd for bloody Wars and mortal Wounds,
And of the Greeks oppressd in Fight, to hear the dying Sounds. 
Now, when twelve Days compleat had run their Race,  
The Gods bethought them of the Cares belonging to their place.  
Jove at their Head ascending from the Sea,  
A shoal of puny Powrs attend his way.
Then Thetis not unmindful of her Son  
Emerging from the Deep, to beg her Boon,  
Pursud their Track; and wakend from his Rest, 
Before the Soveraign stood a Morning Guest. 
Him in the Circle but apart, she found:
The rest at awful Distance stood around.  
She bowd, and eer she durst her Sute begin, 
One Hand embracd his Knees, one propd his Chin. 
Then thus. If I, Celestial Sire, in aught 
Have servd thy Will, or gratifyd thy Thought,
One glimpse of Glory to my Issue give;  
Gracd for the little time he has to live.  
Dishonourd by the King of Men he stands: 
His rightful Prize is ravishd from his Hands.  
But thou, O Father, in my Sons Defence,
Assume thy Powr, assert thy Providence.  
Let Troy prevail, till Greece th Affront has paid  
With doubled Honours; and redeemd his Aid. 
She ceasd, but the considring God was mute: 
Till she, resolvd to win, renewd her Sute:
Nor loosd her Hold, but forcd him to reply, 
Or grant me my Petition, or deny: 
Jove cannot fear: then tell me to my Face 
That I, of all the Gods am least in Grace.  
This I can bear: The Cloud-compeller mournd,
And sighing first, this Answer he returnd: 
Knowst thou what Clamors will disturb my Reign,  
What my stund Ears from Juno must sustain? 
In Council she gives Licence to her Tongue, 
Loquacious, Brawling, ever in the wrong.
And now she will my partial Powr up-braid, 
If alienate from Greece, I give the Trojans Aid.  
But thou depart, and shun her jealous Sight,  
The Care be mine, to do Pelides right.  
Go then, and on the Faith of Jove rely,
When nodding to thy Sute, he bows the Sky.  
This ratifies th irrevocable Doom: 
The Sign ordaind, that what I will shall come: 
The Stamp of Heavn, and Seal of Fate: He said, 
And shook the sacred Honours of his Head.
With Terror trembled Heavns subsiding Hill:  
And from his shaken Curls Ambrosial Dews distil.  
The Goddess goes exulting from his Sight, 
And seeks the Seas profound; and leaves the Realms of Light.  
He moves into his Hall: The Powrs resort,
Each from his House to fill the Sovraigns Court. 
Nor waiting Summons, nor expecting stood; 
But met with Reverence, and receivd the God. 
He mounts the Throne; and Juno took her place:  
But sullen Discontent sate lowring on her Face.
With jealous Eyes, at distance she had seen,  
Whispring with Jove the Silver-footed Queen; 
Then, impotent of Tongue (her Silence broke)  
Thus turbulent in rattling Tone she spoke:  
Author of Ills, and close Contriver Jove,
Which of thy Dames, what Prostitute of Love,  
Has held thy Ear so long, and beggd so hard  
For some old Service done, some new Reward? 
Apart you talkd, for thats your special Care, 
The Consort never must the Council share.
One gracious Word is for a Wife too much: 
Such is a Marriage-Vow, and Joves own Faith is such. 
Then thus the Sire of Gods, and Men below:  
What I have hidden, hope not thou to know.  
Evn Goddesses are Women: And no Wife
Has Powr to regulate her Husbands Life: 
Counsel she may; and I will give thy Ear  
The Knowledge first, of what is fit to hear.  
What I transact with others, or alone,  
Beware to learn; nor press too near the Throne.
To whom the Goddess with the charming Eyes: 
What hast thou said, O Tyrant of the Skies! 
When did I search the Secrets of thy Reign, 
Though priviledgd to know, but priviledgd in vain?  
But well thou dost, to hide from common Sight
Thy close Intrigues, too bad to bear the Light. 
Nor doubt I, but the Silver-footed Dame,  
Tripping from Sea, on such an Errand came 
To grace her Issue, at the Grecians Cost, 
And for one peevish Man destroy an Host.
To whom the Thundrer made this stern Reply;  
My Household Curse, my lawful Plague, the Spy 
Of Joves Designs, his other squinting Eye; 
Why this vain prying, and for what avail? 
Jove will be Master still, and Juno fail.
Shoud thy suspicious Thoughts divine aright, 
Thou but becomst more odious to my Sight,  
For this Attempt: uneasy Life to me 
Still watchd, and importund, but worse for thee.  
Curb that impetuous Tongue, before too late
The Gods behold, and tremble at thy Fate; 
Pitying, but daring not, in thy Defence,  
To lift a Hand against Omnipotence. 
This heard, the Imperious Queen sate mute with Fear:  
Nor further durst incense the gloomy Thunderer.
Silence was in the Court at this Rebuke:  
Nor coud the Gods abashd, sustain their Sovreigns Look.  
The Limping Smith observd the saddend Feast,  
And hopping here and there (himself a Jest) 
Put in his Word, that neither might offend;
To Jove obsequious, yet his Mothers Friend.  
What End in Heavn will be of civil War,  
If Gods of Pleasure will for Mortals jar? 
Such Discord but disturbs our Jovial Feast; 
One Grain of Bad embitters all the best.
Mother, tho wise your self, my Counsel weigh;  
Tis much unsafe my Sire to disobey 
Not only you provoke him to your Cost,  
But Mirth is marrd, and the good Chear is lost.  
Tempt not his heavy Hand; for he has Powr
To throw you Headlong, from his Heavnly Towr. 
But one submissive Word, which you let fall,  
Will make him in good Humour with us All. 
He said no more but crownd a Bowl, unbid:  
The laughing Nectar overlookd the Lid:
Then put it to her Hand; and thus pursued:  
This cursed Quarrel be no more renewd. 
Be, as becomes a Wife, obedient still;  
Though grievd, yet subject to her Husbands Will.  
I would not see you beaten; yet affraid
Of Joves superiour Force, I dare not aid.  
Too well I know him, since that hapless Hour  
When I, and all the Gods employd our Powr 
To break your Bonds: Me by the Heel he drew;  
And oer Heavns Battlements with Fury threw.
All Day I fell; My flight at Morn begun,  
And ended not but with the setting Sun. 
Pitchd on my Head, at length the Lemnian-Ground  
Receivd my batterd Skull, the Sinthians heald my Wound.  
At Vulcans homely Mirth his Mother smild,
And smiling took the Cup the Clown had filled.  
The Reconciler Bowl went round the Board, 
Which emptyd, the rude Skinker still restord. 
Louds Fits of Laughter seizd the Guests, to see  
The limping God so deft at his new Ministry.
The Feast continued till declining Light: 
They drank, they laughd, they lovd, and then twas Night. 
Nor wanted tuneful Harp, nor vocal Quire; 
The Muses sung; Apollo touchd the Lyre.  
Drunken at last, and drowsy they depart,
Each to his House; Adornd with labourd Art  
Of the lame Architect: The thundring God 
Evn he withdrew to rest, and had his Load. 
His swimming Head to needful Sleep applyd; 
And Juno lay unheeded by his Side.


*
Alexander Pope
**
The Wife of Bath
***
BEHOLD the woes of matrimonial life,  
And hear with revrence an experienced wife;  
To dear-bought wisdom give the credit due,  
And think for once a woman tells you true.  
In all these trials I have borne a part:
I was myself the scourge that causd the smart; 
For since fifteen in triumph have I led 
Five captive husbands from the church to bed. 
Christ saw a wedding once, the Scripture says,  
And saw but one, t was thought, in all his days;
Whence some infer, whose conscience is too nice,  
No pious Christian ought to marry twice.  
But let them read, and solve me if they can,  
The words addressd to the Samaritan: 
Five times in lawful wedlock she was joind,
And sure the certain stint was neer defind. 
'Increase and multiply was Heavns command, 
And that s a text I clearly understand:  
This too, 'Let men their sires and mothers leave, 
And to their dearer wives for ever cleave.
More wives than one by Solomon were tried,  
Or else the wisest of mankinds belied. 
I ve had myself full many a merry fit, 
And trust in Heavn I may have many yet;  
For when my transitory spouse, unkind,
Shall die and leave his woful wife behind,  
I ll take the next good Christian I can find.  
Paul, knowing one could never serve our turn, 
Declared t was better far to wed than burn.  
There s danger in assembling fire and tow;
I grant em that; and what it means you know. 
The same apostle, too, has elsewhere ownd  
No precept for virginity he found:  
T is but a counseland we women still  
Take which we like, the counsel or our will.
I envy not their bliss, if he or she  
Think fit to live in perfect chastity:  
Pure let them be, and free from taint or vice;  
I for a few slight spots am not so nice.  
Heavn calls us diffrent ways; on these bestows
One proper gift, another grants to those; 
Not every mans obliged to sell his store,  
And give up all his substance to the poor:  
Such as are perfect may, I cant deny;  
But by your leaves, Divines! so am not I.
Full many a saint, since first the world began, 
Livd an unspotted maid in spite of man:  
Let such (a Gods name) with fine wheat be fed, 
And let us honest wives eat barley bread. 
For me, I ll keep the post assignd by Heavn,
And use the copious talent it has givn:  
Let my good spouse pay tribute, do me right,  
And keep an equal reckning every night;  
His proper body is not his, but mine; 
For so said Paul, and Pauls a sound divine.
Know then, of those five husbands I have had, 
Three were just tolerable, two were bad.  
The three were old, but rich and fond beside, 
And toild most piteously to please their bride;  
But since their wealth (the best they had) was mine,
The rest without much loss I could resign:  
Sure to be lovd, I took no pains to please,  
Yet had more pleasure far than they had ease. 
Presents flowd in apace: with showers of gold  
They made their court, like Jupiter of old:
If I but smiled, a sudden youth they found, 
And a new palsy seizd them when I frownd. 
Ye sovreign Wives! give ear, and understand: 
Thus shall ye speak, and exercise command;  
For never was it givn to mortal man
To lie so boldly as we women can: 
Forswear the fact, tho seen with both his eyes,  
And call your maids to witness how he lies. 
Hark, old Sir Paul! (t was thus I used to say) 
Whence is our neighbours wife so rich and gay?
Treated, caressd, whereer she s pleasd to roam 
I sit in tatters, and immured at home.  
Why to her house dost thou so oft repair? 
Art thou so amrous? and is she so fair?  
If I but see a cousin or a friend,
Lord! how you swell and rage like any fiend!  
But you reel home, a drunken beastly bear,  
Then preach till midnight in your easy chair; 
Cry, wives are false, and every woman evil, 
And give up all that s female to the devil.
If poor (you say), she drains her husbands purse;  
If rich, she keeps her priest, or something worse;  
If highly born, intolerably vain, 
Vapours and pride by turns possess her brain; 
Now gaily mad, now sourly splenetic,
Freakish when well, and fretful when she s sick. 
If fair, then chaste she-cannot long abide, 
By pressing youth attackd on every side; 
If foul, her wealth the lusty lover lures,  
Or else her wit some fool-gallant procures,
Or else she dances with becoming grace, 
Or shape excuses the defects of face. 
There swims no goose so gray, but soon or late  
She finds some honest gander for her mate.  
Horses (thou sayst) and asses men may try,
And ring suspected vessels ere they buy;  
But wives, a random choice, untried they take,  
They dream in courtship, but in wedlock wake; 
Then, not till then, the veils removd away, 
And all the woman glares in open day.
You tell me, to preserve your wifes good grace,  
Your eyes must always languish on my face,  
Your tongue with constant flattries feed my ear, 
And tag each sentence with 'My life! my dear!  
If by strange chance a modest blush be raisd,
Be sure my fine complexion must be praisd. 
My garments always must be new and gay, 
And feasts still kept upon my wedding day.  
Then must my nurse be pleasd, and favrite maid; 
And endless treats and endless visits paid
To a long train of kindred, friends, allies:  
All this thou sayst, and all thou sayst are lies. 
On Jenkin, too, you cast a squinting eye: 
What! can your prentice raise your jealousy? 
Fresh are his ruddy cheeks, his forehead fair,
And like the burnishd gold his curling hair. 
But clear thy wrinkled brow, and quit thy sorrow; 
I d scorn your prentice should you die to-morrow. 
Why are thy chests all lockd? on what design?  
Are not thy worldly goods and treasure mine?
Sir, I m no fool; nor shall you, by St. John,  
Have goods and body to yourself alone.  
One you shall quit, in spite of both your eyes 
I heed not, I, the bolts, the locks, the spies. 
If you had wit, you d say, 'Go where you will,
Dear spouse! I credit not the tales they tell:  
Take all the freedoms of a married life;  
I know thee for a virtuous, faithful wife. 
Lord! when you have enough, what need you care  
How merrily soever others fare?
Tho all the day I give and take delight, 
Doubt not sufficient will be left at night. 
T is but a just and rational desire  
To light a taper at a neighbours fire. 
There s danger too, you think, in rich array,
And none can long be modest that are gay. 
The cat, if you but singe her tabby skin, 
The chimney keeps, and sits content within: 
But once grown sleek, will from her corner run, 
Sport with her tail, and wanton in the sun:
She licks her fair round face, and frisks abroad  
To show her fur, and to be catterwawd. 
Lo thus, my friends, I wrought to my desires  
These three right ancient venerable sires.  
I told them, Thus you say, and thus you do;
And told them false, but Jenkin swore t was true.  
I, like a dog, could bite as well as whine, 
And first complaind wheneer the guilt was mine. 
I taxd them oft with wenching and amours,  
When their weak legs scarce draggd them out of doors;
And swore the rambles that I took by night  
Were all to spy what damsels they bedight:  
That colour brought me many hours of mirth; 
For all this wit is givn us from our birth.  
Heavn gave to woman the peculiar grace
To spin, to weep, and cully human race. 
By this nice conduct and this prudent course, 
By murmring, wheedling, stratagem, and force,  
I still prevaild, and would be in the right; 
Or curtain lectures made a restless night.
If once my husbands arm was oer my side,  
'What! so familiar with your spouse? I cried:  
I levied first a tax upon his need; 
Then let himt was a nicety indeed!  
Let all mankind this certain maxim hold;
Marry who will, our sex is to be sold.  
With empty hands no tassels you can lure, 
But fulsome love for gain we can endure;  
For gold we love the impotent and old,  
And heave, and pant, and kiss, and cling, for gold.
Yet with embraces curses oft I mixt,  
Then kissd again, and chid, and raild betwixt.  
Well, I may make my will in peace, and die, 
For not one word in mans arrears am I. 
To drop a dear dispute I was unable,
Evn though the Pope himself had sat at table;  
But when my point was gaind, then thus I spoke:  
'Billy, my dear, how sheepishly you look! 
Approach, my spouse, and let me kiss thy cheek; 
Thou shouldst be always thus resignd and meek!
Of Jobs great patience since so oft you preach,  
Well should you practise who so well can teach. 
T is difficult to do, I must allow,  
But I, my dearest! will instruct you how. 
Great is the blessing of a prudent wife,
Who puts a period to domestic strife. 
One of us two must rule, and one obey;  
And since in man right Reason bears the sway, 
Let that frail thing, weak woman, have her way. 
The wives of all my family have ruled
Their tender husbands, and their passions coold. 
Fie! t is unmanly thus to sigh and groan:  
What! would you have me to yourself alone?  
Why, take me, love! take all and every part!  
Here s your revenge! you love it at your heart.
Would I vouchsafe to sell what Nature gave, 
You little think what custom I could have.  
But see! I m all your ownnay holdfor shame!  
What means my dear?indeedyou are to blame. 
Thus with my first three lords I passd my life,
A very woman and a very wife. 
What sums from these old spouses I could raise  
Procurd young husbands in my riper days. 
Tho past my bloom, not yet decayd was I,  
Wanton and wild, and chatterd like a pie.
In country dances still I bore the bell,  
And sung as sweet as evning Philomel.  
To clear my quail-pipe, and refresh my soul,  
Full oft I draind the spicy nut-brown bowl;  
Rich luscious wines, that youthful blood improve,
And warm the swelling veins to feats of love: 
For t is as sure as cold engenders hail, 
A liquorish mouth must have a lechrous tail: 
Wine lets no lover unrewarded go, 
As all true gamesters by experience know.
But oh, good Gods! wheneer a thought I cast  
On all the joys of youth and beauty past, 
To find in pleasures I have had my part 
Still warms me to the bottom of my heart. 
This wicked world was once my dear delight;
Now all my conquests, all my charms, good night!  
The flour consumed, the best that now I can 
Is evn to make my market of the bran.  
My fourth dear spouse was not exceeding true; 
He kept, t was thought, a private miss or two;
But all that score I paidAs how? you ll say:  
Not with my body, in a filthy way;  
But I so dressd, and dancd, and drank, and dind  
And viewd a friend with eyes so very kind, 
As stung his heart, and made his marrow fry,
With burning rage and frantic jealousy. 
His soul, I hope, enjoys eternal glory, 
For here on earth I was his purgatory.  
Oft, when his shoe the most severely wrung, 
He put on careless airs, and sat and sung.
How sore I galld him only Heavn could know, 
And he that felt, and I that causd the woe.  
He died when last from pilgrimage I came, 
With other gossips, from Jerusalem; 
And now lies buried underneath a rood,
Fair to be seen, and reard of honest wood: 
A tomb, indeed, with fewer sculptures graced  
Than that Mausolus pious widow placed, 
Or where enshrind the great Darius lay;  
But cost on graves is merely thrown away.
The pit filld up, with turf we coverd oer; 
So bless the good mans soul! I say no more.  
Now for my fifth lovd lord, the last and best; 
(Kind Heavn afford him everlasting rest!)  
Full hearty was his love, and I can show
The tokens on my ribs in black and blue;  
Yet with a knack my heart he could have won,  
While yet the smart was shooting in the bone. 
How quaint an appetite in women reigns! 
Free gifts we scorn, and love what costs us pains.
Let men avoid us, and on them we leap;  
A glutted market makes provision cheap. 
In pure good will I took this jovial spark, 
Of Oxford he, a most egregious clerk. 
He boarded with a widow in the town,
A trusty gossip, one dame Alison; 
Full well the secrets of my soul she knew,  
Better than eer our parish priest could do.  
To her I told whatever could befall:  
Had but my husband pissd against a wall,
Or done a thing that might have cost his life,  
Sheand my nieceand one more worthy wife,  
Had known it all: what most he would conceal, 
To these I made no scruple to reveal. 
Oft has he blushd from ear to ear for shame
That eer he told a secret to his dame. 
It so befell, in holy time of Lent, 
That oft a day I to this gossip went; 
(My husband, thank my stars, was out of town) 
From house to house we rambled up and down,
This clerk, myself, and my good neighbour Alse, 
To see, be seen, to tell, and gather tales. 
Visits to every church we daily paid, 
And marchd in every holy masquerade; 
The stations duly and the vigils kept;
Not much we fasted, but scarce ever slept.  
At sermons, too, I shone in scarlet gay:  
The wasting moth neer spoild my best array; 
The cause was this, I wore it every day.  
T was when fresh May her early blossoms yields,
This clerk and I were walking in the fields.  
We grew so intimate, I cant tell how,  
I pawnd my honour, and engaged my vow, 
If eer I laid my husband in his urn, 
That he, and only he, should serve my turn.
We straight struck hands, the bargain was agreed; 
I still have shifts against a time of need. 
The mouse that always trusts to one poor hole 
Can never be a mouse of any soul. 
I vowd I scarce could sleep since first I knew him,
And durst be sworn he had bewitchd me to him;  
If eer I slept I dreamd of him alone, 
And dreams foretell, as learned men have shown. 
All this I said; but dreams, Sirs, I had none:  
I followd but my crafty cronys lore,
Who bid me tell this lieand twenty more. 
Thus day by day, and month by month we past;  
It pleasd the Lord to take my spouse at last.  
I tore my gown, I soild my locks with dust,  
And beat my breasts, as wretched widowsmust.
Before my face my handkerchief I spread,  
To hide the flood of tears Idid not shed.  
The good mans coffin to the church was borne;  
Around the neighbours and my clerk too mourn. 
But as he marchd, good Gods! he showd a pair
Of legs and feet so clean, so strong, so fair!  
Of twenty winters age he seemd to be; 
I (to say truth) was twenty more than he; 
But vigrous still, a lively buxom dame,  
And had a wondrous gift to quench a flame.
A conjurer once, that deeply could divine,  
Assurd me Mars in Taurus was my sign.  
As the stars orderd, such my life has been:  
Alas, alas! that ever love was sin! 
Fair Venus gave me fire and sprightly grace,
And Mars assurance and a dauntless face.  
By virtue of this powerful constellation, 
I followd always my own inclination. 
But to my tale:A month scarce passd away, 
With dance and song we kept the nuptial day.
All I possessd I gave to his command,  
My goods and chattels, money, house, and land;  
But oft repented, and repent it still;  
He provd a rebel to my sovreign will; 
Nay, once, by Heavn! he struck me on the face:
Hear but the fact, and judge yourselves the case. 
Stubborn as any lioness was I,  
And knew full well to raise my voice on high; 
As true a rambler as I was before,  
And would be so in spite of all he swore.
He against this right sagely would advise,  
And old examples set before my eyes;  
Tell how the Roman matrons led their life,  
Of Gracchus mother, and Duilius wife; 
And close the sermon, as beseemd his wit,
With some grave sentence out of Holy Writ.  
Oft would he say, 'Who builds his house on sands, 
Pricks his blind horse across the fallow lands, 
Or lets his wife abroad with pilgrims roam, 
Deserves a fools-cap and long ears at home.
All this availd not, for whoeer he be 
That tells my faults, I hate him mortally!  
And so do numbers more, I ll boldly say, 
Men, women, clergy, regular and lay.  
My spouse (who was, you know, to learning bred)
A certain treatise oft at evening read, 
Where divers authors (whom the devil confound 
For all their lies) were in one volume bound: 
Valerius whole, and of St. Jerome part; 
Chrysippus and Tertullian, Ovids Art,
Solomons Proverbs, Eloisas loves, 
And many more than sure the church approves.  
More legends were there here of wicked wives  
Than good in all the Bible and saints lives. 
Who drew the lion vanquishd? T was a man:
But could we women write as scholars can, 
Men should stand markd with far more wickedness  
Than all the sons of Adam could redress.  
Love seldom haunts the breast where learning lies,  
And Venus sets ere Mercury can rise.
Those play the scholars who cant play the men, 
And use that weapon which they have, their pen; 
When old, and past the relish of delight, 
Then down they sit, and in their dotage write 
That not one woman keeps her marriage-vow.
(This by the way, but to my purpose now.) 
It chancd my husband, on a winters night, 
Read in this book aloud with strange delight, 
How the first female (as the Scriptures show) 
Brought her own spouse and all his race to woe;
How Samson fell; and he whom Dejanire 
Wrappd in th envenomd shirt, and set on fire;  
How cursd Eriphyle her lord betrayd,  
And the dire ambush Clytemnestra laid;  
But what most pleasd him was the Cretan dame
And husband-bullOh, monstrous! fie, for shame! 
He had by heart the whole detail of woe 
Xantippe made her good man undergo; 
How oft she scolded in a day he knew, 
How many pisspots on the sage she threw
Who took it patiently, and wiped his head:  
'Rain follows thunder, that was all he said. 
He read how Arius to his friend complaind  
A fatal tree was growing in his land, 
On which three wives successively had twind
A sliding noose, and waverd in the wind. 
'Where grows this plant, replied the friend, 'oh where?  
For better fruit did never orchard bear:  
Give me some slip of this most blissful tree, 
And in my garden planted it shall be.
Then how two wives their lords destruction prove,  
Thro hatred one, and one thro too much love;  
That for her husband mixd a poisnous draught, 
And this for lust an amrous philtre bought;  
The nimble juice soon seizd his giddy head,
Frantic at night, and in the morning dead.  
How some with swords their sleeping lords have slain, 
And some have hammerd nails into their brain,  
And some have drenchd them with a deadly potion: 
All this he read, and read with great devotion.
Long time I heard, and swelld, and blushd, and frownd; 
But when no end of these vile tales I found,  
When still he read, and laughd, and read again,  
And half the night was thus consumed in vain, 
Provoked to vengeance, three large leaves I tore,
And with one buffet felld him on the floor.  
With that my husband in a fury rose,  
And down he settled me with hearty blows. 
I groand, and lay extended on my side; 
'Oh! thou hast slain me for my wealth, I cried!
'Yet I forgive theetake my last embrace  
He wept, kind soul! and stoopd to kiss my face:  
I took him such a box as turnd him blue, 
Then sighd and cried, 'Adieu, my dear, adieu! 
But after many a hearty struggle past,
I condescended to be pleasd at last. 
Soon as he said, 'My mistress and my wife!  
Do what you list the term of all your life;  
I took to heart the merits of the cause,  
And stood content to rule by wholesome laws;
Receivd the reins of absolute command, 
With all the government of house and land,  
And empire oer his tongue and oer his hand. 
As for the volume that revild the dames, 
T was torn to fragments, and condemnd to flames.
Now Heavn on all my husbands gone bestow 
Pleasures above for tortures felt below:  
That rest they wishd for grant them in the grave,  
And bless those souls my conduct helpd to save!

**
January and May; or, the Merchant's Tale
***
THERE livd in Lombardy, as authors write,  
In days of old, a wise and worthy Knight; 
Of gentle manners, as of genrous race, 
Blest with much sense, more riches, and some grace: 
Yet, led astray by Venus soft delights,
He scarce could rule some idle appetites: 
For long ago, let priests say what they could,  
Weak sinful laymen were but flesh and blood.  
But in due time, when sixty years were oer,  
He vowd to lead this vicious life no more;
Whether pure holiness inspired his mind,  
Or dotage turnd his brain, is hard to find;  
But his high courage prickd him forth to wed,  
And try the pleasures of a lawful bed.  
This was his nightly dream, his daily care,
And to the heavnly Powers his constant prayer, 
Once, ere he died, to taste the blissful life 
Of a kind husband and a loving wife.  
These thoughts he fortified with reasons still  
(For none want reasons to confirm their will).
Grave authors say, and witty poets sing,  
That honest wedlock is a glorious thing:  
But depth of judgment most in him appears 
Who wisely weds in his maturer years. 
Then let him choose a damsel young and fair,
To bless his age, and bring a worthy heir;  
To soothe his cares, and, free from noise and strife, 
Conduct him gently to the verge of life.  
Let sinful bachelors their woes deplore,  
Full well they merit all they feel, and more:
Unawd by precepts, human or divine,  
Like birds and beasts, promiscuously they join; 
Nor know to make the present blessing last, 
To hope the future, or esteem the past; 
But vainly boast the joys they never tried,
And find divulged the secrets they would hide.  
The married man may bear his yoke with ease,  
Secure at once himself and Heavn to please;  
And pass his inoffensive hours away,  
In bliss all night, and innocence all day:
Tho fortune change, his constant spouse remains, 
Augments his joys, or mitigates his pains.  
But what so pure which envious tongues will spare?  
Some wicked Wits have libelld all the Fair.  
With matchless impudence they style a wife
The dear-bought curse and lawful plague of life,  
A bosom serpent, a domestic evil, 
A night-invasion, and a midday-devil. 
Let not the wise these slandrous words regard, 
But curse the bones of evry lying bard.
All other goods by Fortunes hand are givn,  
A wife is the peculiar gift of Heavn.  
Vain Fortunes favours, never at a stay,  
Like empty shadows pass and glide away; 
One solid comfort, our eternal wife,
Abundantly supplies us all our life:  
This blessing lasts (if those who try say true) 
As long as heart can wishand longer too. 
Our grandsire Adam, ere of Eve possessd, 
Alone, and evn in Paradise unblessd,
With mournful looks the blissful scene surveyd,  
And wanderd in the solitary shade. 
The Maker saw, took pity, and bestowd  
Woman, the last, the best reservd of God.  
A Wife! ah gentle Deities! can he
That has a wife eer feel adversity?  
Would men but follow what the sex advise, 
All things would prosper, all the world grow wise.  
T was by Rebeccas aid that Jacob won  
His fathers blessing from an elder son:
Abusive Nabal owd his forfeit life 
To the wise conduct of a prudent wife:  
Heroic Judith, as old Hebrews show, 
Preservd the Jews, and slew th Assyrian foe:  
At Hesters suit the persecuting sword
Was sheathd, and Israel livd to bless the Lord. 
These weighty motives January the sage  
Maturely ponderd in his riper age; 
And charmd with virtuous joys, and sober life, 
Would try that Christian comfort calld a wife.
His friends were summond on a point so nice  
To pass their judgment, and to give advice; 
But fixd before, and well resolvd was he  
(As men that ask advice are wont to be).  
'My friends, he cried (and cast a mournful look
Around the room, and sighd before he spoke), 
'Beneath the weight of threescore years I bend, 
And, worn with cares, am hastening to my end. 
How I have livd, alas! you know too well  
In worldly follies which I blush to tell;
But gracious Heavn has oped my eyes at last, 
With due regret I view my vices past, 
And, as the precept of the church decrees,  
Will take a wife, and live in holy ease.  
But since by counsel all things should be done,
And many heads are wiser still than one;  
Choose you for me, who best shall be content  
When my desires approvd by your consent.  
'One caution yet is needful to be told, 
To guide your choice; this wife must not be old:
There goes a saying, and t was shrewdly said,  
Old fish at table, but young flesh in bed.  
My soul abhors the tasteless dry embrace  
Of a stale virgin with a winter face: 
In that cold season Love but treats his guest
With bean-straw, and tough forage at the best.  
No crafty widows shall approach my bed; 
Those are too wise for bachelors to wed.  
As subtle clerks by many schools are made,  
Twice married dames are mistresses o th trade:
But young and tender virgins, ruled with ease,  
We form like wax, and mould them as we please.  
'Conceive me, Sirs, nor take my sense amiss;  
T is what concerns my souls eternal bliss;  
Since if I found no pleasure in my spouse,
As flesh is frail, and who (God help me) knows? 
Then should I live in lewd adultery,  
And sink downright to Satan when I die: 
Or were I cursd with an unfruitful bed,  
The righteous end were lost for which I wed;
To raise up seed to bless the Powers above, 
And not for pleasure only, or for love. 
Think not I dote; t is time to take a wife,  
When vigrous blood forbids a chaster life: 
Those that are blest with store of grace divine,
May live like saints by Heavns consent and mine.  
'And since I speak of wedlock, let me say,  
(As, thank my stars, in modest truth I may) 
My limbs are active, still I m sound at heart, 
And a new vigour springs in evry part.
Think not my virtue lost, tho time has shed  
These revrend honours on my hoary head:  
Thus trees are crownd with blossoms white as snow, 
The vital sap then rising from below. 
Old as I am, my lusty limbs appear
Like winter-greens, that flourish all the year. 
Now, Sirs, you know to what I stand inclind, 
Let evry friend with freedom speak his mind.  
He said; the rest in diffrent parts divide;  
The knotty point was urged on either side:
Marriage, the theme on which they all declaimd,  
Some praisd with wit, and some with reason blamed. 
Till, what with proofs, objections, and replies,  
Each wondrous positive and wondrous wise, 
There fell between his brothers a debate:
Placebo this was calld, and Justin that. 
First to the knight Placebo thus begun, 
(Mild were his looks, and pleasing was his tone)  
'Such prudence, Sir, in all your words appears, 
As plainly proves Experience dwells with years!
Yet you pursue sage Solomons advice, 
To work by counsel when affairs are nice: 
But, with the wise mans leave, I must protest, 
So may my soul arrive at ease and rest, 
As still I hold your own advice the best.
'Sir, I have livd a courtier all my days,  
And studied men, their manners, and their ways; 
And have observd this useful maxim still,  
To let my betters always have their will. 
'Nay, if my lord affirmd that black was white,
My word was this, "Your Honour s in the right."  
Th assuming Wit, who deems himself so wise 
As his mistaken patron to advise, 
Let him not dare to vent his dangerous thought; 
A noble fool was never in a fault.
This, Sir, affects not you, whose evry word  
Is weighd with judgment, and befits a Lord:  
Your will is mine; and is (I will maintain) 
Pleasing to God, and should be so to Man; 
At least your courage all the world must praise,
Who dare to wed in your declining days. 
Indulge the vigour of your mounting blood,  
And let gray fools be indolently good,  
Who, past all pleasure, damn the joys of sense, 
With revrend Dulness and grave Impotence.
Justin, who silent sate, and heard the man, 
Thus with a philosophic frown began:  
'A heathen author, of the first degree, 
(Who, tho not Faith, had Sense as well as we)  
Bids us be certain our concerns to trust
To those of genrous principles and just. 
The ventures greater, I ll presume to say,  
To give your person, than your goods away:  
And therefore, Sir, as you regard your rest,  
First learn your ladys qualities at least:
Whether she s chaste or rampant, proud or civil, 
Meek as a saint, or haughty as the devil; 
Whether an easy, fond, familiar Fool, 
Or such a Wit as no man eer can rule.  
T is true, perfection none must hope to find
In all this world, much less in womankind;  
But if her virtue prove the larger share, 
Bless the kind Fates and think your fortune rare. 
Ah, gentle Sir, take warning of a friend, 
Who knows too well the state you thus commend;
And spite of all his praises must declare,  
All he can find is bondage, cost, and care. 
Heavn knows I shed full many a private tear, 
And sigh in silence lest the world should hear; 
While all my friends applaud my blissful life,
And swear no mortals happier in a wife:  
Demure and chaste as any vestal nun,  
The meekest creature that beholds the sun!  
But by th immortal Powers I feel the pain, 
And he that smarts has reason to complain.
Do what you list, for me; you must be sage, 
And cautious sure; for wisdom is in age:  
But at these years to venture on the Fair!  
By him who made the ocean, earth, and air,  
To please a wife, when her occasions call,
Would busy the most vigrous of us all. 
And trust me, sir, the chastest you can choose, 
Will ask observance, and exact her dues.  
If what I speak my noble lord offend, 
My tedious sermon here is at an end.
'T is well, t is wondrous well, the Knight replies,  
'Most worthy kinsman, faith, you re mighty wise! 
We, Sirs, are fools; and must resign the cause  
To heathnish authors, proverbs, and old saws. 
He spoke with scorn, and turnd another way:
'What does my friend, my dear Placebo, say?  
'I say, quoth he, 'by Heavn the mans to blame, 
To slander wives, and wedlocks holy name. 
At this the council rose without delay; 
Each, in his own opinion, went his way;
With full consent, that, all disputes appeasd, 
The Knight should marry when and where he pleasd.  
Who now but January exults with joy?  
The charms of wedlock all his soul employ:  
Each nymph by turns his wavering mind possessd,
And reignd the short-lived tyrant of his breast; 
Whilst fancy pictured evry lively part,  
And each bright image wanderd oer his heart.  
Thus, in some public forum fixd on high, 
A mirror shows the figures moving by;
Still one by one, in swift succession, pass 
The gliding shadows oer the polishd glass.  
This ladys charms the nicest could not blame,  
But vile suspicions had aspersd her fame;  
That was with Sense, but not with Virtue blest;
And one had Grace that wanted all the rest. 
Thus doubting long what nymph he should obey, 
He fixd at last upon the youthful May. 
Her faults he knew not (Love is always blind),  
But every charm revolvd within his mind:
Her tender age, her form divinely fair, 
Her easy motion, her attractive air,  
Her sweet behaviour, her enchanting face, 
Her moving softness, and majestic grace.  
Much in his prudence did our Knight rejoice,
And thought no mortal could dispute his choice: 
Once more in haste he summond evry friend,  
And told them all their pains were at an end. 
'Heavn, that (said he) inspired me first to wed, 
Provides a consort worthy of my bed:
Let none oppose th election, since on this 
Depends my quiet and my future bliss. 
'A dame there is, the darling of my eyes, 
Young, beauteous, artless, innocent, and wise;  
Chaste, tho not rich; and, tho not nobly born,
Of honest parents, and may serve my turn. 
Her will I wed, if gracious Heavn so please, 
To pass my age in sanctity and ease;  
And thank the Powers, I may possess alone 
The lovely prize, and share my bliss with none!
If you, my friends, this virgin can procure,  
My joys are full, my happiness is sure. 
'One only doubt remains: full oft, I ve heard, 
By casuists grave and deep divines averrd, 
That t is too much for human race to know
The bliss of Heavn above and earth below:  
Now should the nuptial pleasures prove so great,  
To match the blessings of the future state, 
Those endless joys were ill exchanged for these:  
Then clear this doubt, and set my mind at ease.
This Justin heard, nor could his spleen control,  
Touchd to the quick, and tickled at the soul.  
'Sir Knight, he cried, 'if this be all you dread,  
Heavn put it past a doubt wheneer you wed;  
And to my fervent prayers so far consent,
That, ere the rites are oer, you may repent! 
Good Heavn, no doubt, the nuptial state approves,  
Since it chastises still what best it loves.  
'Then be not, Sir, abandond to despair;  
Seek, and perhaps you ll find among the Fair
One that may do your business to a hair;  
Not evn in wish your happiness delay,  
But prove the scourge to lash you on your way:  
Then to the skies your mounting soul shall go,  
Swift as an arrow soaring from the bow!
Provided still, you moderate your joy,  
Nor in your pleasures all your might employ:  
Let Reasons rule your strong desires abate,  
Nor please too lavishly your gentle mate. 
Old wives there are, of judgment most acute,
Who solve these questions beyond all dispute; 
Consult with those, and be of better cheer; 
Marry, do penance, and dismiss your fear.  
So said, they rose, nor more the work delayd:  
The match was offerd, the proposals made.
The parents, you may think, would soon comply;  
The old have intrest ever in their eye.  
Nor was it hard to move the ladys mind;  
When Fortune favours, still the Fair are kind.  
I pass each previous settlement and deed,
Too long for me to write, or you to read; 
Nor will with quaint impertinence display 
The pomp, the pageantry, the proud array. 
The time approachd; to church the parties went,  
At once with carnal and devout intent:
Forth came the priest, and bade th obedient wife 
Like Sarah or Rebecca lead her life;  
Then prayd the Powers the fruitful bed to bless, 
And make all sure enough with holiness. 
And now the palace gates are opend wide,
The guests appear in order, side by side, 
And, placed in state, the bridegroom and the bride. 
The breathing flutes soft notes are heard around,  
And the shrill trumpets mix their silver sound; 
The vaulted roofs with echoing music ring,
These touch the vocal stops, and those the trembling string.  
Not thus Amphion tuned the warbling lyre, 
Nor Joab the sounding clarion could inspire,  
Nor fierce Theodamas, whose sprightly strain  
Could swell the soul to rage, and fire the martial train.
Bacchus himself, the nuptial feast to grace,  
(So poets sing) was present on the place: 
And lovely Venus, Goddess of Delight, 
Shook high her flaming torch in open sight, 
And danced around, and smiled on evry Knight:
Pleasd her best servant would his courage try, 
No less in wedlock than in liberty. 
Full many an age old Hymen had not spied  
So kind a bridegroom, or so bright a bride. 
Ye Bards! renownd among the tuneful throng
For gentle lays, and joyous nuptial song, 
Think not your softest numbers can display  
The matchless glories of this blissful day; 
The joys are such as far transcend your rage, 
When tender youth has wedded stooping age.
The beauteous dame sat smiling at the board,  
And darted amrous glances at her lord. 
Not Hesters self, whose charms the Hebrews sing, 
Eer lookd so lovely on her Persian King:  
Bright as the rising sun in summers day,
And fresh and blooming as the month of May! 
The joyful knight surveyd her by his side, 
Nor envied Paris with his Spartan bride:  
Still as his mind revolvd with vast delight  
Th entrancing raptures of th approaching night,
Restless he sat, invoking every Power 
To speed his bliss, and haste the happy hour. 
Meantime the vigrous dancers beat the ground,  
And songs were sung, and flowing bowls went round.  
With odrous spices they perfumed the place,
And mirth and pleasure shone in evry face. 
Damian alone, of all the menial train,  
Sad in the midst of triumphs, sighd for pain,  
Damian alone, the Knights obsequious Squire, 
Consumed at heart, and fed a secret fire.
His lovely mistress all his soul possessd; 
He lookd, he languishd, and could take no rest: 
His task performd, he sadly went his way,  
Fell on his bed, and loathd the light of day:  
There let him lie; till his relenting dame
Weep in her turn, and waste in equal flame. 
The weary sun, as learned poets write,  
Forsook th horizon, and rolld down the light; 
While glittring stars his absent beams supply, 
And nights dark mantle overspread the sky.
Then rose the guests, and as the time required, 
Each paid his thanks, and decently retired. 
The foe once gone, our Knight prepared t undress,  
So keen he was, and eager to possess: 
But first thought fit th assistance to receive,
Which grave physicians scruple not to give: 
Satyrion near, with hot eringoes stood, 
Cantharides, to fire the lazy blood,  
Whose use old Bards describe in luscious rhymes,  
And Critics learnd explain to modern times.
By this the sheets were spread, the bride undressd,  
The room was sprinkled, and the bed was blessd.  
What next ensued beseems not me to say; 
T is sung, he labourd till the dawning day; 
Then briskly sprung from bed, with heart so light,
As all were nothing he had done by night, 
And sippd his cordial as he sat upright. 
He kissd his balmy spouse with wanton play,  
And feebly sung a lusty roundelay:  
Then on the couch his weary limbs he cast;
For evry labour must have rest at last.  
But anxious cares the pensive Squire opprest, 
Sleep fled his eyes, and Peace forsook his breast;  
The raging flames that in his bosom dwell,  
He wanted art to hide, and means to tell:
Yet hoping time th occasion might betray,  
Composed a sonnet to the lovely May;  
Which, writ and folded with the nicest art, 
He wrapt in silk, and laid upon his heart.  
When now the fourth revolving day was run,
(T was June, and Cancer had receivd the sun)  
Forth from her chamber came the beauteous bride;  
The good old Knight movd slowly by her side. 
High mass was sung; they feasted in the hall; 
The servants round stood ready at their call.
The Squire alone was absent from the board, 
And much his sickness grievd his worthy lord,  
Who prayd his spouse, attended with her train, 
To visit Damian, and divert his pain. 
Th obliging dames obeyd with one consent:
They left the hall, and to his lodging went.  
The female tribe surround him as he lay,  
And close beside him sat the gentle May:  
Where, as she tried his pulse, he softly drew 
A heaving sigh, and cast a mournful view!
Then gave his bill, and bribed the Powers divine, 
With secret vows to favour his design.  
Who studies now but discontented May? 
On her soft couch uneasily she lay: 
The lumpish husband snored away the night,
Till coughs awaked him near the morning light.  
What then he did, I ll not presume to tell,  
Nor if she thought herself in Heavn or Hell: 
Honest and dull in nuptial bed they lay,  
Till the bell tolld, and all arose to pray.
Were it by forceful Destiny decreed,  
Or did from Chance, or Natures power proceed;  
Or that some star, with aspect kind to love,  
Shed its selectest influence from above;  
Whatever was the cause, the tender dame
Felt the first motions of an infant flame;  
Receivd th impressions of the lovesick Squire,  
And wasted in the soft infectious fire. 
Ye Fair, draw near, let Mays example move  
Your gentle minds to pity those who love!
Had some fierce tyrant in her stead been found, 
The poor adorer sure had hangd or drownd: 
But she, your sexs mirror, free from pride,  
Was much too meek to prove a homicide.  
But to my tale:Some sages have defind
Pleasure the sovreign bliss of humankind:  
Our Knight (who studied much, we may suppose) 
Derived his high philosophy from those; 
For, like a prince, he bore the vast expense  
Of lavish pomp, and proud magnificence:
His house was stately, his retinue gay. 
Large was his train, and gorgeous his array.  
His spacious garden, made to yield to none, 
Was compassd round with walls of solid stone;  
Priapus could not half describe the grace
(Tho God of gardens) of this charming place: 
A place to tire the rambling wits of France 
In long descriptions, and exceed Romance: 
Enough to shame the gentlest bard that sings  
Of painted meadows, and of purling springs.
Full in the centre of the flowery ground  
A crystal fountain spread its streams around, 
The fruitful banks with verdant laurels crownd:  
About this spring (if ancient Fame say true)  
The dapper Elves their moonlight sports pursue:
Their pygmy King, and little fairy Queen, 
In circling dances gambold on the green, 
While tuneful sprites a merry concert made, 
And airy music warbled thro the shade. 
Hither the noble Knight would oft repair
(His scene of pleasure, and peculiar care); 
For this he held it dear, and always bore 
The silver key that lockd the garden door. 
To this sweet place in summers sultry heat 
He used from noise and busness to retreat;
And here in dalliance spend the livelong day, 
Solus cum sola, with his sprightly May: 
For whateer work was undischargd abed,  
The duteous Knight in this fair garden sped.  
But ah! what mortal lives of bliss secure?
How short a space our worldly joys endure!  
O Fortune, fair, like all thy treachrous kind, 
But faithless still, and wavring as the wind!  
O painted monster, formd mankind to cheat, 
With pleasing poison, and with soft deceit!
This rich, this amrous, venerable Knight,  
Amidst his ease, his solace, and delight, 
Struck blind by thee, resigns his days to grief,  
And calls on death, the wretchs last relief. 
The rage of jealousy then seizd his mind,
For much he feard the faith of womankind.  
His wife, not sufferd from his side to stray,  
Was captive kept; he watchd her night and day, 
Abridgd her pleasures, and confind her sway.  
Full oft in tears did hapless May complain,
And sighd full oft; but sighd and wept in vain; 
She lookd on Damian with a lovers eye;  
For oh, t was fixd; she must possess or die!  
Nor less impatience vexd her amrous Squire, 
Wild with delay, and burning with desire.
Watchd as she was, yet could he not refrain  
By secret writing to disclose his pain: 
The dame by signs reveald her kind intent, 
Till both were conscious what each other meant, 
Ah! gentle Knight, what would thy eyes avail,
Tho they could see as far as ships can sail? 
T is better, sure, when blind, deceivd to be, 
Than be deluded when a man can see! 
Argus himself, so cautious and so wise, 
Was overwatchd, for all his hundred eyes:
So many an honest husband may, t is known, 
Who, wisely, never thinks the case his own. 
The dame at last, by diligence and care,  
Procured the key her Knight was wont to bear; 
She took the wards in wax before the fire,
And gave th impression to the trusty Squire. 
By means of this some wonder shall appear,  
Which, in due place and season, you may hear. 
Well sung sweet Ovid, in the days of yore,  
What sleight is that which love will not explore!
And Pyramus and Thisbe plainly show 
The feats true lovers, when they list, can do:  
Tho watchd and captive, yet in spite of all,  
They found the art of kissing thro a wall. 
But now no longer from our tale to stray,
It happd, that once upon a summers day  
Our revrend Knight was urged to amrous play:  
He raisd his spouse ere matin-bell was rung, 
And thus his morning canticle he sung:  
'Awake, my love, disclose thy radiant eyes;
Arise, my wife, my beauteous lady, rise!  
Hear how the doves with pensive notes complain, 
And in soft murmurs tell the trees their pain:  
The winters past; the clouds and tempests fly; 
The sun adorns the fields, and brightens all the sky.
Fair without spot, whose evry charming part  
My bosom wounds, and captivates my heart! 
Come, and in mutual pleasures let s engage,  
Joy of my life, and comfort of my age. 
This heard, to Damian straight a sign she made
To haste before; the gentle Squire obeyd:  
Secret and undescried he took his way,  
And ambushd close behind an arbour lay.  
It was not long ere January came, 
And hand in hand with him his lovely dame;
Blind as he was, not doubting all was sure, 
He turnd the key, and made the gate secure.  
'Here let us walk, he said, 'observd by none, 
Conscious of pleasures to the world unknown:  
So may my soul have joy, as thou, my wife,
Art far the dearest solace of my life;  
And rather would I choose, by Heavn above, 
To die this instant, than to lose thy love. 
Reflect what truth was in my passion shown, 
When, unendowd, I took thee for my own,
And sought no treasure but thy heart alone. 
Old as I am, and now deprived of sight, 
Whilst thou art faithful to thy own true Knight,  
Nor age, nor blindness, robs me of delight. 
Each other loss with patience I can bear,
The loss of thee is what I only fear. 
'Consider then, my lady and my wife,  
The solid comforts of a virtuous life.  
As first, the love of Christ himself you gain;  
Next, your own honour undefiled mountain;
And, lastly, that which sure your mind must move, 
My whole estate shall gratify your love:  
Make your own terms, and ere to-morrows sun  
Displays his light, by Heavn it shall be done  
I seal the contract with a holy kiss,
And will performby this, my dear, and this.  
Have comfort, Spouse, nor think thy lord unkind;  
T is love, not jealousy, that fires my mind: 
For when thy charms my sober thoughts engage, 
And joind to them my own unequal age,
From thy dear side I have no power to part, 
Such secret transports warm my melting heart. 
For who that once possessd those heavnly charms,  
Could live one moment absent from thy arms?  
He ceasd, and May with modest grace replied
(Weak was her voice, as while she spoke she cried): 
'Heavn knows (with that a tender sigh she drew)  
I have a soul to save as well as you; 
And, what no less you to my charge commend, 
My dearest honour, will to death defend.
To you in holy church I gave my hand, 
And joind my heart in wedlocks sacred band: 
Yet after this, if you distrust my care,  
Then hear, my lord, and witness what I swear: 
First may the yawning earth her bosom rend,
And let me hence to Hell alive descend; 
Or die the death I dread no less than Hell, 
Sewd in a sack, and plunged into a well; 
Ere I my fame by one lewd act disgrace, 
Or once renounce the honour of my race.
For know, Sir Knight, of gentle blood I came; 
I loathe a whore, and startle at the name.  
But jealous men on their own crimes reflect,  
And learn from thence their ladies to suspect:  
Else why these needless cautions, Sir, to me?
These doubts and fears of female constancy? 
This chime still rings in every ladys ear, 
The only strain a wife must hope to hear.  
Thus while she spoke a sidelong glance she cast,  
Where Damain kneeling worshipd as she past.
She saw him watch the motions of her eye, 
And singled out a pear tree planted nigh: 
T was charged with fruit that made a goodly show,  
And hung with dangling pears was every bough. 
Thither th obsequious Squire addressd his pace,
And climbing, in the summit took his place; 
The Knight and Lady walkd beneath in view, 
Where let us leave them, and our tale pursue. 
T was now the season when the glorious sun 
His heavnly progress through the Twins had run;
And Jove, exalted, his mild influence yields, 
To glad the glebe, and paint the flowery fields:  
Clear was the day, and Phbus, rising bright, 
Had streakd the azure firmament with light;  
He piercd the glittring clouds with golden streams,
And warmd the womb of earth with genial beams. 
It so befell, in that fair morning tide 
The fairies sported on the garden side, 
And in the midst their monarch and his bride. 
So featly trippd the light-foot Ladies round,
The Knights so nimbly oer the greensward bound,  
That scarce they bent the flowers, or touchd the ground. 
The dances ended, all the fairy train 
For pinks and daisies searchd the flowery plain, 
While on a bank reclind of rising green,
Thus, with a frown, the King bespoke his Queen. 
'T is too apparent, argue what you can,  
The treachery you women use to man: 
A thousand authors have this truth made out,  
And sad experience leaves no room for doubt.
'Heavn rest thy spirit, noble Solomon, 
A wiser Monarch never saw the sun:  
All wealth, all honours, the supreme degree 
Of earthly bliss, was well bestowd on thee!  
For sagely hast thou said, "Of all mankind,
One only just, and righteous, hope to find: 
But shouldst thou search the spacious world around, 
Yet one good woman is not to be found." 
'Thus says the King who knew your wickedness; 
The son of Sirach testifies no less.
So may some wildfire on your bodies fall, 
Or some devouring plague consume you all; 
As well you view the lecher in the tree,  
And well this honourable Knight you see:  
But since he s blind and old (a helpless case),
His Squire shall cuckold him before your face.  
'Now by my own dread Majesty I swear, 
And by this awful sceptre which I bear, 
No impious wretch shall scape unpunishd long, 
That in my presence offers such a wrong.
I will this instant undeceive the Knight, 
And in the very act restore his sight:  
And set the strumpet here in open view, 
A warning to the ladies, and to you,  
And all the faithless sex, for ever to be true."
'And will you so, replied the Queen, 'indeed?  
Now, by my mothers soul, it is decreed,  
She shall not want an answer at her need. 
For her, and for her daughters, I ll engage, 
And all the sex in each succeeding age;
Art shall be theirs to varnish an offence,  
And fortify their crimes with confidence. 
Nay, were they taken in a strict embrace, 
Seen with both eyes, and piniond on the place; 
All they shall need is to protest and swear,
Breathe a soft sigh, and drop a tender tear;  
Till their wise husbands, gulld by arts like these,  
Grow gentle, tractable, and tame as geese.  
'What tho this slandrous Jew, this Solomon, 
Calld women fools, and knew full many a one?
The wiser Wits of later times declare 
How constant, chaste, and virtuous women are: 
Witness the Martyrs, who resignd their breath, 
Serene in torments, unconcernd in death; 
And witness next what Roman authors tell,
How Arria, Portia, and Lucretia fell. 
'But since the sacred leaves to all are free, 
And men interpret texts, why should not we? 
By this no more was meant than to have shown  
That sovreign goodness dwells in him alone,
Who only Is, and is but only One. 
But grant the worst; shall women then be weighd  
By every word that Solomon hath said? 
What tho this king (as ancient story boasts) 
Built a fair temple to the Lord of Hosts;
He ceasd at last his Maker to adore, 
And did as much for idol Gods, or more. 
Beware what lavish praises you confer 
On a rank lecher and idolater;  
Whose reign indulgent God, says Holy Writ,
Did but for Davids righteous sake permit;  
David, the monarch after Heavns own mind, 
Who lovd our sex, and honourd all our kind. 
'Well, I m a woman, and as such must speak;  
Silence would swell me, and my heart would break.
Know, then, I scorn your dull authorities,  
Your idle Wits, and all their learned lies: 
By Heavn, those authors are our sexs foes,  
Whom, in our right, I must and will oppose.  
'Nay (quoth the King) dear madam, be not wroth:
I yield it up; but since I gave my oath,  
That this much injurd Knight again should see, 
It must be doneI am a King, said he,  
'And one whose faith has ever sacred been 
'And so has mine (she said)I am a Queen:
Her answer she shall have, I undertake; 
And thus an end of all dispute I make.  
Try when you list; and you shall find, my lord, 
It is not in our sex to break our word.  
We leave them here in this heroic strain,
And to the Knight our story turns again;  
Who in the garden, with his lovely May, 
Sung merrier than the cuckoo or the jay:  
This was his song, 'O kind and constant be, 
Constant and kind I ll ever prove to thee.
Thus singing as he went, at last he drew  
By easy steps to where the pear-tree grew:  
The longing dame lookd up, and spied her love  
Full fairly perchd among the boughs above. 
She stoppd, and sighing, 'O good Gods! she cried,
'What pangs, what sudden shoots distend my side?  
O for that tempting fruit, so fresh, so green!  
Help, for the love of Heavns immortal Queen!  
Help, dearest lord, and save at once the life 
Of thy poor infant, and thy longing wife!
Sore sighd the Knight to hear his ladys cry,  
But could not climb, and had no servant nigh: 
Old as he was, and void of eyesight too,  
What could, alas! a helpless husband do?  
'And must I languish then (she said), and die,
Yet view the lovely fruit before my eye?  
At least, kind Sir, for charitys sweet sake, 
Vouchsafe the trunk between your arms to take,  
Then from your back I might ascend the tree;  
Do you but stoop, and leave the rest to me.
'With all my soul, he thus replied again,  
'I d spend my dearest blood to ease thy pain. 
With that his back against the trunk he bent; 
She seizd a twig, and up the tree she went.  
Now prove your patience, gentle ladies all!
Nor let on me your heavy anger fall:  
T is truth I tell, tho not in phrase refind; 
Tho blunt my tale, yet honest is my mind.  
What feats the lady in the tree might do, 
I pass, as gambols never known to you;
But sure it was a merrier fit, she swore, 
Than in her life she ever felt before.  
In that nice moment, lo! the wondring Knight 
Lookd out, and stood restord to sudden sight. 
Straight on the tree his eager eyes he bent,
As one whose thoughts were on his spouse intent:  
But when he saw his bosom-wife so dressd,  
His rage was such as cannot be expressd. 
Not frantic mothers when their infants die  
With louder clamours rend the vaulted sky:
He cried, he roard, he stormd, he tore his hair;  
'Death! Hell! and Furies! what dost thou do there? 
'What ails my lord? the trembling dame replied,  
'I thought your patience had been better tried: 
Is this your love, ungrateful and unkind,
This my reward for having cured the blind?  
Why was I taught to make my husband see,  
By struggling with a man upon a tree? 
Did I for this the power of magic prove?  
Unhappy wife, whose crime was too much love!
'If this be struggling, by this holy light, 
T is struggling with a vengeance (quoth the Knight): 
So Heavn preserve the sight it has restored, 
As with these eyes I plainly saw thee whored; 
Whored by my slaveperfidious wretch! may Hell
As surely seize thee, as I saw too well. 
'Guard me, good Angels! cried the gentle May,  
'Pray Heavn this magic work the proper way!  
Alas, my love! t is certain, could you see,  
You neer had used these killing words to me:
So help me, Fates! as t is no perfect sight, 
But some faint glimmring of a doubtful light. 
'What I have said (quoth he) I must maintain, 
For by th immortal Powers it seemd too plain  
'By all those Powers, some frenzy seizd your mind
(Replied the dame): are these the thanks I find?  
Wretch that I am, that eer I was so kind! 
She said; a rising sigh expressd her woe,  
The ready tears apace began to flow,  
And as they fell she wiped from either eye
The drops (for women, when they list, can cry). 
The Knight was touchd; and in his looks appeard 
Signs of remorse, while thus his spouse he cheerd; 
'Madam, t is past, and my short anger oer!  
Come down, and vex your tender heart no more.
Excuse me, dear, if aught amiss was said, 
For, on my soul, amends shall soon be made: 
Let my repentance your forgiveness draw;  
By Heavn, I swore but what I thought I saw. 
'Ah, my lovd lord! t was much unkind (she cried)
On bare suspicion thus to treat your bride. 
But till your sights establishd, for a while  
Imperfect objects may your sense beguile. 
Thus, when from sleep we first our eyes display,  
The balls are wounded with the piercing ray,
And dusky vapours rise, and intercept the day;  
So just recovring from the shades of night 
Your swimming eyes are drunk with sudden light, 
Strange phantoms dance around, and skim before your sight.  
Then, Sir, be cautious, nor too rashly deem;
Heavn knows how seldom things are what they seem!  
Consult your reason, and you soon shall find  
T was you were jealous, not your wife unkind:  
Jove neer spoke oracle more true than this,  
None judge so wrong as those who think amiss.
With that she leapd into her lords embrace, 
With well dissembled virtue in her face.  
He huggd her close, and kissd her oer and oer,  
Disturbd with doubts and jealousies no more: 
Both pleasd and blessd, renewd their mutual vows:
A fruitful wife, and a believing spouse.  
Thus ends our tale; whose moral next to make, 
Let all wise husbands hence example take; 
And pray, to crown the pleasure of their lives, 
To be so well deluded by their wives.

**
The Temple of Fame
***

IN that soft season, when descending showers  
Call forth the greens, and wake the rising flowers, 
When opening buds salute the welcome day, 
And earth relenting feels the genial ray; 
As balmy sleep had charmd my cares to rest,
And love itself was banishd from my breast,  
(What time the morn mysterious visions brings,  
While purer slumbers spread their golden wings) 
A train of phantoms in wild order rose, 
And joind, this intellectual scene compose.
I stood, methought, betwixt earth, seas, and skies, 
The whole Creation open to my eyes; 
In air self-balanced hung the globe below,  
Where mountains rise and circling oceans flow;  
Here naked rocks and empty wastes were seen,
There towery cities, and the forests green; 
Here sailing ships delight the wandring eyes,  
There trees and intermingled temples rise:  
Now a clear sun the shining scene displays, 
The transient landscape now in clouds decays.
Oer the wide prospect as I gazed around, 
Sudden I heard a wild promiscuous sound,  
Like broken thunders that at distance roar, 
Or billows murmring on the hollow shore: 
Then gazing up, a glorious Pile beheld,
Whose towring summit ambient clouds conceald; 
High on a rock of ice the structure lay,  
Steep its ascent, and slippry was the way; 
The wondrous rock like Parian marble shone, 
And seemd, to distant sight, of solid stone.
Inscriptions here of various names I viewd,  
The greater part by hostile time subdued; 
Yet wide was spread their fame in ages past,  
And poets once had promisd they should last. 
Some fresh engraved appeard of wits renownd;
I lookd again, nor could their trace be found. 
Critics I saw, that other names deface, 
And fix their own with labour, in their place:  
Their own, like others, soon their place resignd,  
Or disappeard and left the first behind.
Nor was the work impaird by storms alone,  
But felt th approaches of too warm a sun;  
For Fame, impatient of extremes, decays 
Not more by envy than excess of praise. 
Yet part no injuries of Heavn could feel,
Like crystal faithful to the graving steel: 
The rocks high summit, in the temples shade,  
Nor heat could melt, nor beating storm invade.  
Their names inscribed unnumberd ages past  
From Times first birth, with Time itself shall last:
These ever new, nor subject to decays,  
Spread, and grow brighter with the length of days.  
So Zemblas rocks (the beauteous work of frost) 
Rise white in air, and glitter oer the coast;  
Pale suns, unfelt, at distance roll away,
And on th impassive ice the lightnings play; 
Eternal snows the growing mass supply,  
Till the bright mountains prop th incumbent sky: 
As Atlas fixd, each hoary pile appears,  
The gatherd winter of a thousand years.
On this foundation Fames high temple stands; 
Stupendous pile! not reard by mortal hands.  
Whateer proud Rome or artful Greece beheld,  
Or elder Babylon, its frame excelld. 
Four faces had the dome, and evry face
Of various structure, but of equal grace: 
Four brazen gates, on columns lifted high,  
Salute the diffrent quarters of the sky. 
Here fabled Chiefs in darker ages born, 
Or Worthies old whom Arms or Arts adorn,
Who cities raised or tamed a monstrous race,  
The walls in venerable order grace: 
Heroes in animated marble frown,  
And Legislators seem to think in stone. 
Westward, a sumptuous frontispiece appeard,
On Doric pillars of white marble reard,  
Crownd with an architrave of antique mould,  
And sculpture rising on the roughend gold. 
In shaggy spoils here Theseus was beheld, 
And Perseus dreadful with Minervas shield:
There great Alcides, stooping with his toil,  
Rests on his club, and holds th Hesperian spoil: 
Here Orpheus sings; trees moving to the sound 
Start from their roots, and form a shade around:  
Amphion there the loud creating lyre
Strikes, and beholds a sudden Thebes aspire;  
Cithrons echoes answer to his call, 
And half the mountain rolls into a wall:  
There might you see the lengthning spires ascend,  
The domes swell up, and widening arches bend,
The growing towers, like exhalations, rise, 
And the huge columns heave into the skies.  
The eastern front was glorious to behold, 
With diamond flaming, and barbaric gold.  
There Ninus shone, who spread th Assyrian fame,
And the great founder of the Persian name;  
There in long robes the royal Magi stand, 
Grave Zoroaster waves the circling wand;  
The sage Chaldeans robed in white appeard, 
And Brahmans, deep in desert woods revered.
These stoppd the moon, and call th unbodied shades 
To midnight banquets in the glimmring glades;  
Made visionary fabrics round them rise, 
And airy spectres skim before their eyes; 
Of talismans and sigils knew the power,
And careful watchd the planetary hour. 
Superior, and alone, Confucius stood, 
Who taught that useful science,to be good. 
But on the south, a long majestic race  
Of Egypts priests the gilded niches grace,
Who measured earth, described the starry spheres, 
And traced the long records of Lunar Years. 
High on his car Sesostris struck my view, 
Whom sceptred slaves in golden harness drew:  
His hands a bow and pointed javlin hold;
His giant limbs are armd in scales of gold.  
Between the statues obelisks were placed, 
And the learnd walls with hieroglyphics graced.  
Of Gothic structure was the northern side,  
Oerwrought with ornaments of barbrous pride.
There huge Colosses rose, with trophies crownd,  
And Runic characters were graved around;  
There sat Zamolxis with erected eyes, 
And Odin here in mimic trances dies.  
There on rude iron columns, smeard with blood,
The horrid forms of Scythian Heroes stood,  
Druids and Bards (their once loud harps unstrung) 
And youths that died to be by poets sung. 
These and a thousand more of doubtful fame, 
To whom old fables gave a lasting name,
In ranks adornd the temples outward face; 
The wall in lustre and effect like glass, 
Which oer each object casting various dyes,  
Enlarges some, and others multiplies; 
Nor void of emblem was the mystic wall,
For thus romantic Fame increases all. 
The temple shakes, the sounding gates unfold, 
Wide vaults appear, and roofs of fretted gold,  
Raisd on a thousand pillars, wreathd around 
With laurel foliage, and with eagles crownd.
Of bright transparent beryl were the walls, 
The friezes gold, and gold the capitals;  
As Heavn with stars, the roof with jewels glows, 
And ever-living lamps depend in rows. 
Full in the passage of each spacious gate
The sage Historians in white garments wait; 
Graved oer their seats the from of Time was found, 
His scythe reversd, and both his pinions bound.  
Within stood Heroes, who thro loud alarms  
In bloody fields pursued renown in arms.
High on a throne, with trophies charged, I viewd 
The youth that all things but himself subdued;  
His feet on sceptres and tiaras trod, 
And his hornd head belied the Libyan God,  
There Csar, graced with both Minervas, shone;
Csar, the worlds great master, and his own; 
Unmovd, superior still in evry state, 
And scarce detested in his countrys fate.  
But chief were those who not for empire fought, 
But with their toils their peoples safety bought:
High oer the rest Epaminondas stood; 
Timoleon, glorious in his brothers blood;  
Bold Scipio, saviour of the Roman state,  
Great in his triumphs, in retirement great; 
And wise Aurelius, in whose well-taught mind
With boundless power unbounded virtue joind, 
His own strict judge, and patron of mankind.  
Much-suffring heroes next their honours claim. 
Those of less noisy, and less guilty fame,  
Fair Virtues silent train: supreme of these
Here ever shines the godlike Socrates:  
He whom ungrateful Athens could expel,  
At all times just, but when he signd the shell:  
Here his abode the martyrd Phocion claims, 
With Agis, not the last of Spartan names:
Unconquerd Cato shows the wound he tore, 
And Brutus his ill genius meets no more.  
But in the centre of the hallowd choir 
Six pompous columns oer the rest aspire: 
Around the shrine itself of Fame they stand,
Hold the chief honours and the fane command.  
High on the first the mighty Homer shone; 
Eternal adamant composed his throne;  
Father of verse! in holy fillets drest, 
His silver beard waved gently oer his breast;
Tho blind, a boldness in his looks appears;  
In years he seemd, but not impaird by years.  
The wars of Troy were round the pillar seen;  
Here fierce Tydides wounds the Cyprian Queen; 
Here Hector, glorious from Patroclus fall,
Here, draggd in triumph round the Trojan wall. 
Motion and life did evry part inspire, 
Bold was the work, and provd the masters fire:  
A strong expression most he seemd t affect, 
And here and there disclosed a brave neglect.
A golden column next in rank appeard,  
On which a shrine of purest gold was reard;  
Finishd the whole, and labourd evry part,  
With patient touches of unwearied art.  
The Mantuan there in sober triumph sate,
Composed his posture, and his look sedate;  
On Homer still he fixd a revrend eye, 
Great without pride, in modest majesty. 
In living sculpture on the sides were spread  
The Latian wars, and haughty Turnus dead;
Eliza stretchd upon the funeral pyre;  
neas bending with his aged sire: 
Troy flamed in burning gold, and oer the throne  
'Arms and the man in golden ciphers shone. 
Four swans sustain a car of silver bright,
With heads advanced, and pinions stretchd for flight:  
Here, like some furious prophet, Pindar rode, 
And seemd to labour with th inspiring God.  
Across the harp a careless hand he flings,  
And boldly sinks into the sounding strings.
The figured games of Greece the column grace: 
Neptune and Jove survey the rapid race; 
The youths hang oer the chariots as they run;  
The fiery steeds seem starting from the stone;  
The champions in distorted postures threat;
And all appeard irregularly great. 
Here happy Horace tuned th Ausonian lyre 
To sweeter sounds, and temperd Pindars fire:  
Pleasd with Alcus manly rage t infuse 
The softer spirit of the Sapphic Muse.
The polishd pillar diffrent sculptures grace; 
A work outlasting monumental brass. 
Here smiling loves and bacchanals appear, 
The Julian star, and great Augustus here; 
The doves, that round the infant poet spread
Myrtles and bays, hung hovring oer his head.  
Here, in a shrine that cast a dazzling light, 
Sate fixd in thought the mighty Stagyrite; 
His sacred head a radiant Zodiac crownd, 
And various animals his sides surround:
His piercing eyes, erect, appear to view  
Superior worlds, and look all Nature thro. 
With equal rays immortal Tully shone; 
The Roman rostra deckd the consuls throne;  
Gathring his flowing robe, he seemd to stand
In act to speak, and graceful stretchd his hand; 
Behind, Romes Genius waits with civic crowns,  
And the great father of his country owns. 
These massy columns in a circle rise, 
Oer which a pompous dome invades the skies;
Scarce to the top I stretchd my aching sight,  
So large it spread, and swelld to such a height. 
Full in the midst proud Fames imperial seat  
With jewels blazed, magnificently great;  
The vivid emralds there revive the eye,
The flaming rubies show their sanguine dye, 
Bright azure rays from lively sapphires stream, 
And lucid amber casts a golden gleam. 
With various-colourd light the pavement shone, 
And all on fire appeard the glowing throne;
The domes high arch reflects the mingled blaze,  
And forms a rainbow of alternate rays.  
When on the Goddess first I cast my sight,  
Scarce seemd her stature of a cubits height;  
But swelld to larger size, the more I gazed,
Till to the roof her towring front she raisd. 
With her, the temple evry moment grew, 
And ampler vistas opend to my view:  
Upward the columns shoot, the roofs ascend, 
And arches widen, and long aisles extend.
Such was her form, as ancient bards have told;  
Wings raise her arms, and wings her feet infold;  
A thousand busy tongues the Goddess bears,  
A thousand open eyes, and thousand listning ears.  
Beneath, in order ranged, the tuneful Nine
(Her virgin handmaids) still attend the shrine; 
With eyes on Fame for ever fixd, they sing;  
For Fame they raise the voice, and tune the string; 
With Times first birth began the heavnly lays,  
And last, eternal, thro the length of days.
Around these wonders as I cast a look,  
The trumpet sounded, and the temple shook,  
And all the nations summond at the call, 
From diffrent quarters fill the crowded hall.  
Of various tongues the mingled sounds were heard;
In various garbs promiscuous throngs appeard:  
Thick as the bees, that with the spring renew 
Their flowery toils, and sip the fragrant dew,  
When the wingd colonies first tempt the sky, 
Oer dusky fields and shaded waters fly,
Or, settling, seize the sweets the blossoms yield,  
And a low murmur runs along the field.  
Millions of suppliant crowds the shrine attend, 
And all degrees before the Goddess bend;  
The poor, the rich, the valiant, and the sage,
And boasting youth, and narrative old age.  
Their pleas were diffrent, their request the same; 
For good and bad alike are fond of Fame.  
Some she disgraced and some with honours crownd; 
Unlike successes equal merits found.
Thus her blind sister, fickle Fortune, reigns,  
And, undiscerning, scatters crowns and chains.  
First at the shrine the learned world appear, 
And to the Goddess thus prefer their prayer:  
'Long have we sought t instruct and please mankind,
With studies pale, with midnight-vigils blind;  
But thankd by few, rewarded yet by none, 
We here appeal to thy superior throne:  
On Wit and Learning the just prize bestow,  
For Fame is all we must expect below.
The Goddess heard, and bade the Muses raise 
The golden trumpet of eternal praise: 
From pole to pole the winds diffuse the sound,  
That fills the circuit of the world around; 
Not all at once, as thunder breaks the cloud,
The notes at first were rather sweet than loud; 
By just degrees they every moment rise, 
Fill the wide earth, and gain upon the skies. 
At every breath were balmy odours shed, 
Which still grew sweeter as they wider spread;
Less fragrant scents th unfolding rose exhales,  
Or spices breathing in Arabian gales. 
Next these the good and just, an awful train, 
Thus on their knees address the sacred fane:  
'Since living virtue is with envy cursd,
And the best men are treated like the worst,  
Do thou, just Goddess, call our merits forth, 
And give each deed th exact intrinsic worth.  
'Not with bare justice shall your act be crownd  
(Said Fame), but high above desert renownd:
Let fuller notes th applauding world amaze,  
And the loud clarion labour in your praise.  
This band dismissd, behold another crowd 
Preferrd the same request, and lowly bowd;  
The constant tenor of whose well-spent days
No less deservd a just return of praise. 
But straight the direful trump of Slander sounds; 
Thro the big dome the doubling thunder bounds; 
Loud as the burst of cannon rends the skies,  
The dire report thro every region flies,
In every ear incessant rumours rung,  
And gathring scandals grew on every tongue.  
From the black trumpets rusty concave broke  
Sulphureous flames, and clouds of rolling smoke:  
The poisnous vapour blots the purple skies,
And withers all before it as it flies.  
A troop came next, who crowns and armour wore,  
And proud defiance in their looks they bore:  
'For thee (they cried) amidst alarms and strife,  
We saild in tempests down the stream of life;
For thee whole nations filld with flames and blood,  
And swam to Empire thro the purple flood:  
Those ills we dared, thy inspiration own; 
What virtue seemd, was done for thee alone. 
'Ambitious fools! (the Queen replied, and frownd)
'Be all your acts in dark oblivion drownd; 
There sleep forgot, with mighty tyrants gone, 
Your statues moulderd, and your names unknown!  
A sudden cloud straight snatchd them from my sight,  
And each majestic phantom sunk in night.
Then came the smallest tribe I yet had seen;  
Plain was their dress, and modest was their mien: 
'Great Idol of mankind! we neither claim  
The praise of Merit, nor aspire to Fame!  
But safe in deserts from th applause of men,
Would die unheard of, as we livd unseen; 
T is all we beg thee, to conceal from sight  
Those acts of goodness which themselves requite.  
O let us still the secret joy partake,  
To follow Virtue evn for Virtues sake.
'And live there men who slight immortal fame? 
Who then with incense shall adore our name? 
But, mortals! know, t is still our greatest pride  
To blaze those virtues which the good would hide. 
Rise! Muses, rise! add all your tuneful breath;
These must not sleep in darkness and in death. 
She said: in air the trembling music floats,  
And on the winds triumphant swell the notes;  
So soft, tho high, so loud, and yet so clear,  
Evn listning angels leand from Heavn to hear:
To farthest shores th ambrosial spirit flies,  
Sweet to the world, and grateful to the skies.  
Next these a youthful train their vows expressd, 
With feathers crownd, with gay embroidry dressd: 
'Hither they cried 'direct your eyes, and see
The men of pleasure, dress, and gallantry.  
Ours is the place at banquets, balls, and plays,  
Sprightly our nights, polite are all our days;  
Courts we frequent, where t is our pleasing care 
To pay due visits, and address the Fair;
In fact, t is true, no nymph we could persuade,  
But still in fancy vanquishd evry maid; 
Of unknown Duchesses lewd tales we tell,  
Yet, would the world believe us, all were well; 
The joy let others have, and we the name,
And what we want in pleasure, grant in fame. 
The Queen assents: the trumpet rends the skies, 
And at each blast a ladys honour dies. 
Pleasd with the strange success, vast numbers prest  
Around the shrine, and made the same request:
'What you she cried, 'unlearnd in arts to please, 
Slaves to yourselves, and evn fatigued with ease,  
Who lose a length of undeserving days,  
Would you usurp the lovers dear-bought praise? 
To just contempt, ye vain pretenders, fall,
The peoples fable, and the scorn of all.  
Straight the black clarion sends a horrid sound,  
Loud laughs burst out, and bitter scoffs fly round; 
Whispers are heard, with taunts reviling loud,  
And scornful hisses run thro all the crowd.
Last, those who boast of mighty mischiefs done, 
Enslave their country, or usurp a throne; 
Or who their glorys dire foundation laid 
On sovreigns ruind, or on friends betrayd; 
Calm, thinking villains, whom no faith could fix,
Of crooked counsels and dark politics;  
Of these a gloomy tribe surround the throne,  
And beg to make th immortal treasons known.  
The trumpet roars, long flaky flames expire,  
With sparks that seemd to set the world on fire.
At the dread sound pale mortals stood aghast, 
And startled Nature trembled with the blast.  
This having heard and seen, some Power unknown  
Straight changed the scene, and snatchd me from the throne.  
Before my view appeard a structure fair,
Its site uncertain, if in earth or air; 
With rapid motion turnd the mansion round; 
With ceaseless noise the ringing walls resound: 
Not less in number were the spacious doors  
Than leaves on trees, or sands upon the shores;
Which still unfolded stand, by night, by day, 
Pervious to winds, and open every way.  
As flames by nature to the skies ascend,  
As weighty bodies to the centre tend, 
As to the sea returning rivers roll,
And the touchd needle trembles to the pole,  
Hither, as to their proper place, arise 
All various sounds from earth, and seas, and skies, 
Or spoke aloud, or whisperd in the ear;  
Nor ever silence, rest, or peace is here.
As on the smooth expanse of crystal lakes 
The sinking stone at first a circle makes;  
The trembling surface by the motion stirrd,  
Spreads in a second circle, then a third; 
Wide, and more wide, the floating rings advance,
Fill all the watry plain, and to the margin dance: 
Thus every voice and sound, when first they break,  
On neighbring air a soft impression make;  
Another ambient circle then they move;  
That in its turn, impels the next above;
Thro undulating air the sounds are sent, 
And spread oer all the fluid element.  
There various news I heard of love and strife,  
Of peace and war, health, sickness, death, and life,  
Of loss and gain, of famine, and of store,
Of storms at sea, and travels on the shore, 
Of prodigies, and portents seen in air, 
Of fires and plagues, and stars with blazing hair,  
Of turns of fortune, changes in the state,  
The fall of favrites, projects of the great,
Of old mismanagements, taxations new; 
All neither wholly false, nor wholly true.  
Above, below, without, within, around,  
Confused, unnumberd multitudes are found,  
Who pass, repass, advance, and glide away,
Hosts raisd by fear, and phantoms of a day:  
Astrologers, that future fates foreshew,  
Projectors, quacks, and lawyers not a few;  
And priests, and party zealots, numerous bands, 
With home-born lies or tales from foreign lands;
Each talkd aloud, or in some secret place, 
And wild impatience stared in evry face. 
The flying rumours gatherd as they rolld, 
Scarce any tale was sooner heard than told; 
And all who told it added something new,
And all who heard it made enlargements too; 
In evry ear it spread, on evry tongue it grew.  
Thus flying east and west, and north and south, 
News traveld with increase from mouth to mouth.  
So from a spark that, kindled first by chance,
With gathring force the quickning flames advance; 
Till to the clouds their curling heads aspire,  
And towers and temples sink in floods of fire.  
When thus ripe lies are to perfection sprung, 
Full grown, and fit to grace a mortal tongue,
Thro thousand vents, impatient, forth they flow, 
And rush in millions on the world below.  
Fame sits aloft, and points them out their course,  
Their date determines, and prescribes their force;  
Some to remain, and some to perish soon,
Or wane and wax alternate like the moon.  
Around, a thousand winged wonders fly,  
Borne by the trumpets blast, and scatterd thro the sky.  
There, at one passage, oft you might survey 
A lie and truth contending for the way;
And long t was doubtful, both so closely pent, 
Which first should issue thro the narrow vent: 
At last agreed, together out they fly,  
Inseparable now the truth and lie;  
The strict companions are for ever joind,
And this or that unmixd, no mortal eer shall find,  
While thus I stood, intent to see and hear, 
One came, methought, and whisperd in my ear: 
'What could thus high thy rash ambition raise?  
Art thou, fond youth, a candidate for praise?
'T is true, said I, 'not void of hopes I came,  
For who so fond as youthful bards of Fame?  
But few, alas! the casual blessing boast, 
So hard to gain, so easy to be lost.  
How vain that second life in others breath,
Th estate which wits inherit after death!  
Ease, health, and life for this they must resign, 
(Unsure the tenure, but how vast the fine!) 
The great mans curse, without the gains, endure, 
Be envied, wretched; and be flatterd, poor;
All luckless wits their enemies profest,  
And all successful, jealous friends at best.  
Nor Fame I slight, nor for her favours call;  
She comes unlookd for, if she comes at all.  
But if the purchase costs so dear a price
As soothing Folly, or exalting Vice;  
Oh! if the Muse must flatter lawless sway,  
And follow still where Fortune leads the way; 
Or if no basis bear my rising name, 
But the falln ruins of anothers fame;
Then teach me, Heavn! to scorn the guilty bays;  
Drive from my breast that wretched lust of praise;  
Unblemishd let me live or die unknown; 
Oh, grant an honest fame, or grant me none!

**
Sappho to Phaeon
***

SAY, lovely Youth, that dost my heart command,  
Can Phaons eyes forget his Sapphos hand?  
Must then her name the wretched writer prove, 
To thy remembrance lost, as to thy love?  
Ask not the cause that I new numbers choose,
The lute neglected and the lyric Muse;  
Love taught my tears in sadder notes to flow, 
And tuned my heart to elegies of woe. 
I burn, I burn, as when thro ripend corn  
By driving winds the spreading flames are borne!
Phaon to tnas scorching fields retires, 
While I consume with more than tnas fires!  
No more my soul a charm in music finds; 
Music has charms alone for peaceful minds.  
Soft scenes of solitude no more can please;
Love enters there, and I m my own disease. 
No more the Lesbian dames my passion move,  
Once the dear objects of my guilty love;  
All other loves are lost in only thine, 
O youth, ungrateful to a flame like mine!
Whom would not all those blooming charms surprise,  
Those heavnly looks, and dear deluding eyes? 
The harp and bow would you like Phbus bear,  
A brighter Phbus Phaon might appear; 
Would you with ivy wreathe your flowing hair,
Not Bacchus self with Phaon could compare: 
Yet Phbus lovd, and Bacchus felt the flame, 
One Daphne warmd, and one the Cretan dame; 
Nymphs that in verse no more could rival me,  
Than evn those Gods, contend in charms with thee.
The Muses teach me all their softest lays,  
And the wide world resounds with Sapphos praise. 
Tho Great Alcus more sublimely sings, 
And strikes with bolder rage the sounding strings,  
No less renown attends the moving lyre,
Which Venus tunes, and all her loves inspire; 
To me what Nature has in charms denied, 
Is well by Wits more lasting flames supplied.  
Tho short my stature, yet my name extends  
To Heavn itself, and earths remotest ends.
Brown as I am, an Ethiopian dame  
Inspired young Perseus with a genrous flame; 
Turtles and doves of diffrent hues unite,  
And glossy jet is paird with shining white.  
If to no charms thou wilt thy heart resign,
But such as merit, such as equal thine, 
By none, alas! by none thou canst employ, 
Phaon alone by Phaon must be lovd! 
Yet once thy Sappho could thy cares employ, 
Once in her arms you centred all your joy:
No time the dear remembrance can remove,  
For oh! how vast a memory has Love! 
My music, then, you could for ever hear,  
And all my words were music to your ear.  
You stoppd with kisses my enchanting tongue,
And found my kisses sweeter than my song. 
In all I pleasd, but most in what was best;  
And the last joy was dearer than the rest.  
Then with each word, each glance, each motion fired,  
You still enjoyd, and yet you still desired,
Till, all dissolving, in the trance we lay, 
And in tumultuous raptures died away. 
The fair Sicilians now thy soul inflame;  
Why was I born, ye Gods, a Lesbian dame?  
But ah, beware, Sicilian nymphs! nor boast
That wandring heart which I so lately lost;  
Nor be with all those tempting words abused,  
Those tempting words were all to Sappho used. 
And you that rule Sicilias happy plains, 
Have pity, Venus, on your poets pains!
Shall fortune still in one sad tenor run, 
And still increase the woes so soon begun?  
Inured to sorrow from my tender years,  
My parents ashes drank my early tears: 
My brother next, neglecting wealth and fame,
Ignobly burnd in a destructive flame:  
An infant daughter late my griefs increasd,  
And all a mothers cares distract my breast.  
Alas! what more could Fate itself impose, 
But thee, the last, and greatest of my woes?
No more my robes in waving purple flow, 
Nor on my hand the sparkling diamonds glow; 
No more my locks in ringlets curld diffuse 
The costly sweetness of Arabian dews, 
Nor braids of gold the varied tresses bind,
That fly disorderd with the wanton wind: 
For whom should Sappho use such arts as these?  
Hes gone, whom only she desired to please! 
Cupids light darts my tender bosom move; 
Still is there cause for Sappho still to love:
So from my birth the sisters fixd my doom, 
And gave to Venus all my life to come;  
Or, while my Muse in melting notes complains, 
My yielding heart keeps measure to my strains.  
By charms like thine which all my soul have won,
Who might notah! who would not be undone?  
For those Aurora Cephalus might scorn,  
And with fresh blushes paint the conscious morn.  
For those might Cynthia lengthen Phaons sleep, 
And bid Endymion nightly tend his sheep.
Venus for those had rapt thee to the skies; 
But Mars on thee might look with Venus eyes. 
O scarce a youth, yet scarce a tender boy!  
O useful time for lovers to employ! 
Pride of thy age, and glory of thy race,
Come to these arms, and melt in this embrace! 
The vows you never will return, receive;  
And take, at least, the love you will not give. 
See, while I write, my words are lost in tears! 
The less my sense, the more my love appears.
Sure t was not much to bid one kind adieu  
(At least to feign was never hard to you):  
'Farewell, my Lesbian love, you might have said; 
Or coldly thus, 'Farewell, O Lesbian maid! 
No tear did you, no parting kiss receive,
Nor knew I then how much I was to grieve. 
No lovers gift your Sappho could confer, 
And wrongs and woes were all you left with her. 
No charge I gave you, and no charge could give, 
But this, 'Be mindful of our loves, and live.
Now by the Nine, those powers adord by me, 
And Love, the God that ever waits on thee,  
When first I heard (from whom I hardly knew)  
That you were fled, and all my joys with you, 
Like some sad statue, speechless, pale, I stood,
Grief chilld my breast, and stopt my freezing blood; 
No sigh to rise, no tear had power to flow, 
Fixd in a stupid lethargy of woe:  
But when its way th impetuous passion found, 
I rend my tresses, and my breast I wound;
I rave, then weep; I curse, and then complain;  
Now swell to rage, now melt in tears again. 
Not fiercer pangs distract the mournful dame, 
Whose first-born infant feeds the funeral flame.  
My scornful brother with a smile appears,
Insults my woes, and triumphs in my tears;  
His hated image ever haunts my eyes;  
'And why this grief? thy daughter lives, he cries, 
Stung with my love, and furious with despair, 
All torn my garments, and my bosom bare,
My woes, thy crimes, I to the world proclaim, 
Such inconsistent things are Love and Shame!  
T is thou art all my care and my delight,  
My daily longing, and my dream by night:  
O night more pleasing than the brightest day,
When fancy gives what absence takes away, 
And, dressd in all its visionary charms, 
Restores my fair deserter to my arms! 
Then round your neck in wanton wreaths I twine; 
Then you, methinks, as fondly circle mine:
A thousand tender words I hear and speak; 
A thousand melting kisses give and take:  
Then fiercer joysI blush to mention these, 
Yet, while I blush, confess how much they please. 
But when, with day, the sweet delusions fly,
And all things wake to life and joy but I,  
As if once more forsaken, I complain, 
And close my eyes to dream of you again:  
Then frantic rise, and like some fury rove  
Thro lonely plains, and thro the silent grove;
As if the silent grove, and lonely plains,  
That knew my pleasures, could relieve my pains. 
I view the grotto, once the scene of love,  
The rocks around, the hanging roofs above,  
That charmd me more, with native moss oergrown,
Than Phrygian marble, or the Parian stone:  
I find the shades that veild our joys before;  
But, Phaon gone, those shades delight no more.  
Here the pressd herbs with bending tops betray 
Where oft entwind in amrous folds we lay;
I kiss that earth which once was pressd by you,  
And all with tears the withring herbs bedew. 
For thee the fading trees appear to mourn,  
And birds defer their songs till thy return:  
Night shades the groves, and all in silence lie,
All but the mournful Philomel and I:  
With mournful Philomel I join my strain,  
Of Tereus she, of Phaon I complain. 
A spring there is, whose silver waters show,  
Clear as a glass, the shining sands below:
A flowery lotos spreads its arms above, 
Shades all the banks, and seems itself a grove; 
Eternal greens the mossy margin grace,  
Watchd by the sylvan genius of the place.  
Here as I lay, and swelld with tears the flood,
Before my sight a watry virgin stood:  
She stood and cried, 'O you that love in vain!  
Fly hence, and seek the fair Leucadian main.  
There stands a rock, from whose impending steep 
Apollos fane surveys the rolling deep;
There injurd lovers, leaping from above, 
Their flames extinguish, and forget to love.  
Deucalion once with hopeless fury burnd; 
In vain he lovd, relentless Pyrrha scornd;  
But when from hence he plunged into the main,
Deucalion scornd, and Pyrrha lovd in vain.  
Haste, Sappho, haste, from high Leucadia throw  
Thy wretched weight, nor dread the deeps below!  
She spoke, and vanishd with the voiceI rise,  
And silent tears fall trickling from my eyes.
I go, ye Nymphs! those rocks and seas to prove; 
How much I fear, but ah, how much I love! 
I go, ye Nymphs! where furious love inspires, 
Let female fears submit to female fires.  
To rocks and seas I fly from Phaons hate,
And hope from seas and rocks a milder fate. 
Ye gentle gales, beneath my body blow,  
And softly lay me on the waves below! 
And thou, kind Love, my sinking limbs sustain,  
Spread thy soft wings, and waft me oer the main,
Nor let a lovers death the guiltless flood profane;  
On Phbus shrine my harp I ll then bestow,  
And this inscription shall be placed below: 
'Here she who sung, to him that did inspire,  
Sappho to Phbus consecrates her lyre:
What suits with Sappho, Phbus, suits with thee;  
The Gift, the Giver, and the God agree.  
But why, alas! relentless youth, ah why 
To distant seas must tender Sappho fly? 
Thy charms than those may far more powerful be,
And Phbus self is less a God to me. 
Ah! canst thou doom me to the rocks and sea,  
Oh! far more faithless and more hard than they? 
Ah! canst thou rather see this tender breast  
Dashd on these rocks than to thy bosom pressd?
This breast which once, in vain! you liked so well  
Where the Loves playd, and where the Muses dwell.  
Alas! the Muses now no more inspire;  
Untuned my lute, and silent is my lyre. 
My languid numbers have forgot to flow,
And fancy sinks beneath a weight of woe.  
Ye Lesbian virgins, and ye Lesbian dames, 
Themes of my verse, and objects of my flames, 
No more your groves with my glad songs shall ring,  
No more these hands shall touch the trembling string:
My Phaons fled, and I those arts resign; 
(Wretch that I am, to call that Phaon mine!)  
Return, fair youth, return, and bring along 
Joy to my soul, and vigour to my song:  
Absent from thee, the poets flame expires;
But ah! how fiercely burn the lovers fires!  
Gods! can no prayers, no sighs, no numbers move 
One savage heart, or teach it how to love?  
The winds my prayers, my sighs, my numbers bear,  
The flying winds have lost them all in air!
Oh when, alas! shall more auspicious gales  
To these fond eyes restore thy welcome sails! 
If you returnah, why these long delays?  
Poor Sappho dies while careless Phaon stays.  
O launch thy bark, nor fear the watry plain;
Venus for thee shall smooth her native main.  
O launch thy bark, secure of prosprous gales;  
Cupid for thee shall spread the swelling sails. 
If you will fly(yet ah! what cause can be, 
Too cruel youth, that you should fly from me?)
If not from Phaon I must hope for ease, 
Ah let me seek it from the raging seas: 
To raging seas unpitied I ll remove, 
And either cease to live or cease to love!

**
An Essay on Criticism
***

'Tis hard to say if greater want of skill
Appear in writing or in judging ill,
But of the two less dangerous is the offense
To tire our patience than mislead our sense
Some few in that but numbers err in this,
Ten censure wrong for one who writes amiss,
A fool might once himself alone expose,
Now one in verse makes many more in prose.

'Tis with our judgments as our watches, none
Go just alike, yet each believes his own
In poets as true genius is but rare
True taste as seldom is the critic share
Both must alike from Heaven derive their light,
These born to judge as well as those to write
Let such teach others who themselves excel,
And censure freely, who have written well
Authors are partial to their wit, 'tis true
But are not critics to their judgment too?

Yet if we look more closely we shall find
Most have the seeds of judgment in their mind
Nature affords at least a glimmering light
The lines though touched but faintly are drawn right,
But as the slightest sketch if justly traced
Is by ill coloring but the more disgraced
So by false learning is good sense defaced
Some are bewildered in the maze of schools
And some made coxcombs nature meant but fools
In search of wit these lose their common sense
And then turn critics in their own defense
Each burns alike who can or cannot write
Or with a rival's or an eunuch's spite
All fools have still an itching to deride
And fain would be upon the laughing side
If Maevius scribble in Apollo's spite
There are who judge still worse than he can write.

Some have at first for wits then poets passed
Turned critics next and proved plain fools at last
Some neither can for wits nor critics pass
As heavy mules are neither horse nor ass.
Those half-learned witlings, numerous in our isle,
As half-formed insects on the banks of Nile
Unfinished things one knows not what to call
Their generation is so equivocal
To tell them would a hundred tongues require,
Or one vain wits that might a hundred tire.

But you who seek to give and merit fame,
And justly bear a critic's noble name,
Be sure yourself and your own reach to know
How far your genius taste and learning go.
Launch not beyond your depth, but be discreet
And mark that point where sense and dullness meet.

Nature to all things fixed the limits fit
And wisely curbed proud man's pretending wit.
As on the land while here the ocean gains.
In other parts it leaves wide sandy plains
Thus in the soul while memory prevails,
The solid power of understanding fails
Where beams of warm imagination play,
The memory's soft figures melt away
One science only will one genius fit,
So vast is art, so narrow human wit
Not only bounded to peculiar arts,
But oft in those confined to single parts
Like kings, we lose the conquests gained before,
By vain ambition still to make them more
Each might his several province well command,
Would all but stoop to what they understand.

First follow nature and your judgment frame
By her just standard, which is still the same.
Unerring nature still divinely bright,
One clear, unchanged and universal light,
Life force and beauty, must to all impart,
At once the source and end and test of art
Art from that fund each just supply provides,
Works without show and without pomp presides
In some fair body thus the informing soul
With spirits feeds, with vigor fills the whole,
Each motion guides and every nerve sustains,
Itself unseen, but in the effects remains.
Some, to whom Heaven in wit has been profuse,
Want as much more, to turn it to its use;
For wit and judgment often are at strife,
Though meant each other's aid, like man and wife.
'Tis more to guide, than spur the muse's steed,
Restrain his fury, than provoke his speed,
The winged courser, like a generous horse,
Shows most true mettle when you check his course.

Those rules, of old discovered, not devised,
Are nature still, but nature methodized;
Nature, like liberty, is but restrained
By the same laws which first herself ordained.

Hear how learned Greece her useful rules indites,
When to repress and when indulge our flights.
High on Parnassus' top her sons she showed,
And pointed out those arduous paths they trod;
Held from afar, aloft, the immortal prize,
And urged the rest by equal steps to rise.
Just precepts thus from great examples given,
She drew from them what they derived from Heaven.
The generous critic fanned the poet's fire,
And taught the world with reason to admire.
Then criticism the muse's handmaid proved,
To dress her charms, and make her more beloved:
But following wits from that intention strayed
Who could not win the mistress, wooed the maid
Against the poets their own arms they turned
Sure to hate most the men from whom they learned
So modern pothecaries taught the art
By doctors bills to play the doctor's part.
Bold in the practice of mistaken rules
Prescribe, apply, and call their masters fools.
Some on the leaves of ancient authors prey,
Nor time nor moths e'er spoil so much as they.
Some dryly plain, without invention's aid,
Write dull receipts how poems may be made
These leave the sense their learning to display,
And those explain the meaning quite away.

You then, whose judgment the right course would steer,
Know well each ancient's proper character,
His fable subject scope in every page,
Religion, country, genius of his age
Without all these at once before your eyes,
Cavil you may, but never criticise.
Be Homers works your study and delight,
Read them by day and meditate by night,
Thence form your judgment thence your maxims bring
And trace the muses upward to their spring.
Still with itself compared, his text peruse,
And let your comment be the Mantuan Muse.

When first young Maro in his boundless mind,
A work to outlast immortal Rome designed,
Perhaps he seemed above the critic's law
And but from nature's fountain scorned to draw
But when to examine every part he came
Nature and Homer were he found the same
Convinced, amazed, he checks the bold design
And rules as strict his labored work confine
As if the Stagirite o'erlooked each line
Learn hence for ancient rules a just esteem,
To copy nature is to copy them.

Some beauties yet no precepts can declare,
For there's a happiness as well as care.
Music resembles poetry--in each
Are nameless graces which no methods teach,
And which a master hand alone can reach
If, where the rules not far enough extend
(Since rules were made but to promote their end),
Some lucky license answer to the full
The intent proposed that license is a rule.
Thus Pegasus a nearer way to take
May boldly deviate from the common track
Great wits sometimes may gloriously offend,
And rise to faults true critics dare not mend,
From vulgar bounds with brave disorder part,
And snatch a grace beyond the reach of art,
Which without passing through the judgment gains
The heart and all its end at once attains.
In prospects, thus, some objects please our eyes,
Which out of nature's common order rise,
The shapeless rock or hanging precipice.
But though the ancients thus their rules invade
(As kings dispense with laws themselves have made),
Moderns beware! or if you must offend
Against the precept, ne'er transgress its end,
Let it be seldom, and compelled by need,
And have, at least, their precedent to plead.
The critic else proceeds without remorse,
Seizes your fame, and puts his laws in force.

I know there are, to whose presumptuous thoughts
Those freer beauties, even in them, seem faults
Some figures monstrous and misshaped appear,
Considered singly, or beheld too near,
Which, but proportioned to their light, or place,
Due distance reconciles to form and grace.
A prudent chief not always must display
His powers in equal ranks and fair array,
But with the occasion and the place comply.
Conceal his force, nay, seem sometimes to fly.
Those oft are stratagems which errors seem,
Nor is it Homer nods, but we that dream.

Still green with bays each ancient altar stands,
Above the reach of sacrilegious hands,
Secure from flames, from envy's fiercer rage,
Destructive war, and all-involving age.
See, from each clime the learned their incense bring;
Hear, in all tongues consenting Paeans ring!
In praise so just let every voice be joined,
And fill the general chorus of mankind.
Hail! bards triumphant! born in happier days;
Immortal heirs of universal praise!
Whose honors with increase of ages grow,
As streams roll down, enlarging as they flow;
Nations unborn your mighty names shall sound,
And worlds applaud that must not yet be found!
Oh may some spark of your celestial fire,
The last, the meanest of your sons inspire,
(That, on weak wings, from far pursues your flights,
Glows while he reads, but trembles as he writes),
To teach vain wits a science little known,
To admire superior sense, and doubt their own!

Of all the causes which conspire to blind
Man's erring judgment and misguide the mind,
What the weak head with strongest bias rules,
Is pride, the never-failing vice of fools.
Whatever nature has in worth denied,
She gives in large recruits of needful pride;
For as in bodies, thus in souls, we find
What wants in blood and spirits, swelled with wind:
Pride where wit fails steps in to our defense,
And fills up all the mighty void of sense.
If once right reason drives that cloud away,
Truth breaks upon us with resistless day
Trust not yourself, but your defects to know,
Make use of every friend--and every foe.

A little learning is a dangerous thing
Drink deep, or taste not the Pierian spring
There shallow draughts intoxicate the brain,
And drinking largely sobers us again.
Fired at first sight with what the muse imparts,
In fearless youth we tempt the heights of arts
While from the bounded level of our mind
Short views we take nor see the lengths behind
But more advanced behold with strange surprise,
New distant scenes of endless science rise!
So pleased at first the towering Alps we try,
Mount o'er the vales and seem to tread the sky,
The eternal snows appear already passed
And the first clouds and mountains seem the last.
But those attained we tremble to survey
The growing labors of the lengthened way
The increasing prospect tires our wandering eyes,
Hills peep o'er hills and Alps on Alps arise!

A perfect judge will read each work of wit
With the same spirit that its author writ
Survey the whole nor seek slight faults to find
Where nature moves and rapture warms the mind,
Nor lose for that malignant dull delight
The generous pleasure to be charmed with wit
But in such lays as neither ebb nor flow,
Correctly cold and regularly low
That, shunning faults, one quiet tenor keep;
We cannot blame indeed--but we may sleep.
In wit, as nature, what affects our hearts
Is not the exactness of peculiar parts,
'Tis not a lip, or eye, we beauty call,
But the joint force and full result of all.
Thus, when we view some well proportioned dome
(The worlds just wonder, and even thine, O Rome!),
No single parts unequally surprise,
All comes united to the admiring eyes;
No monstrous height or breadth, or length, appear;
The whole at once is bold, and regular.

Whoever thinks a faultless piece to see.
Thinks what ne'er was, nor is, nor e'er shall be.
In every work regard the writer's end,
Since none can compass more than they intend;
And if the means be just, the conduct true,
Applause, in spite of trivial faults, is due.
As men of breeding, sometimes men of wit,
To avoid great errors, must the less commit:
Neglect the rules each verbal critic lays,
For not to know some trifles is a praise.
Most critics, fond of some subservient art,
Still make the whole depend upon a part:
They talk of principles, but notions prize,
And all to one loved folly sacrifice.

Once on a time La Mancha's knight, they say,
A certain bard encountering on the way,
Discoursed in terms as just, with looks as sage,
As e'er could Dennis, of the Grecian stage;
Concluding all were desperate sots and fools,
Who durst depart from Aristotle's rules
Our author, happy in a judge so nice,
Produced his play, and begged the knight's advice;
Made him observe the subject, and the plot,
The manners, passions, unities, what not?
All which, exact to rule, were brought about,
Were but a combat in the lists left out
"What! leave the combat out?" exclaims the knight.
"Yes, or we must renounce the Stagirite."
"Not so, by heaven!" (he answers in a rage)
"Knights, squires, and steeds must enter on the stage."
"So vast a throng the stage can ne'er contain."
"Then build a new, or act it in a plain."

Thus critics of less judgment than caprice,
Curious, not knowing, not exact, but nice,
Form short ideas, and offend in arts
(As most in manners) by a love to parts.

Some to conceit alone their taste confine,
And glittering thoughts struck out at every line;
Pleased with a work where nothing's just or fit;
One glaring chaos and wild heap of wit.
Poets, like painters, thus, unskilled to trace
The naked nature and the living grace,
With gold and jewels cover every part,
And hide with ornaments their want of art.
True wit is nature to advantage dressed;
What oft was thought, but ne'er so well expressed;
Something, whose truth convinced at sight we find
That gives us back the image of our mind.
As shades more sweetly recommend the light,
So modest plainness sets off sprightly wit
For works may have more wit than does them good,
As bodies perish through excess of blood.

Others for language all their care express,
And value books, as women men, for dress.
Their praise is still--"the style is excellent,"
The sense they humbly take upon content
Words are like leaves, and where they most abound
Much fruit of sense beneath is rarely found.
False eloquence, like the prismatic glass.
Its gaudy colors spreads on every place,
The face of nature we no more survey.
All glares alike without distinction gay:
But true expression, like the unchanging sun,
Clears and improves whate'er it shines upon;
It gilds all objects, but it alters none.
Expression is the dress of thought, and still
Appears more decent, as more suitable,
A vile conceit in pompous words expressed,
Is like a clown in regal purple dressed
For different styles with different subjects sort,
As several garbs with country town and court
Some by old words to fame have made pretense,
Ancients in phrase, mere moderns in their sense;
Such labored nothings, in so strange a style,
Amaze the unlearned, and make the learned smile.
Unlucky, as Fungoso in the play,
These sparks with awkward vanity display
What the fine gentleman wore yesterday;
And but so mimic ancient wits at best,
As apes our grandsires in their doublets dressed.
In words as fashions the same rule will hold,
Alike fantastic if too new or old.
Be not the first by whom the new are tried,
Nor yet the last to lay the old aside

But most by numbers judge a poet's song
And smooth or rough, with them is right or wrong.
In the bright muse though thousand charms conspire,
Her voice is all these tuneful fools admire,
Who haunt Parnassus but to please their ear,
Not mend their minds, as some to church repair,
Not for the doctrine but the music there
These equal syllables alone require,
Though oft the ear the open vowels tire;
While expletives their feeble aid do join;
And ten low words oft creep in one dull line,
While they ring round the same unvaried chimes,
With sure returns of still expected rhymes,
Where'er you find "the cooling western breeze,"
In the next line it "whispers through the trees"
If crystal streams "with pleasing murmurs creep"
The reader's threatened (not in vain) with "sleep"
Then, at the last and only couplet fraught
With some unmeaning thing they call a thought,
A needless Alexandrine ends the song
That, like a wounded snake drags its slow length along.

Leave such to tune their own dull rhymes, and know
What's roundly smooth or languishingly slow;
And praise the easy vigor of a line,
Where Denham's strength, and Waller's sweetness join.
True ease in writing comes from art, not chance,
As those move easiest who have learned to dance
'Tis not enough no harshness gives offense,
The sound must seem an echo to the sense.
Soft is the strain when Zephyr gently blows,
And the smooth stream in smoother numbers flows,
But when loud surges lash the sounding shore,
The hoarse, rough verse should like the torrent roar,
When Ajax strives some rock's vast weight to throw,
The line too labors, and the words move slow;
Not so, when swift Camilla scours the plain,
Flies o'er the unbending corn, and skims along the main.
Hear how Timotheus' varied lays surprise,
And bid alternate passions fall and rise!
While, at each change, the son of Libyan Jove
Now burns with glory, and then melts with love;
Now his fierce eyes with sparkling fury glow,
Now sighs steal out, and tears begin to flow:
Persians and Greeks like turns of nature found,
And the world's victor stood subdued by sound?
The power of music all our hearts allow,
And what Timotheus was, is Dryden now.

Avoid extremes, and shun the fault of such,
Who still are pleased too little or too much.
At every trifle scorn to take offense,
That always shows great pride, or little sense:
Those heads, as stomachs, are not sure the best,
Which nauseate all, and nothing can digest.
Yet let not each gay turn thy rapture move;
For fools admire, but men of sense approve:
As things seem large which we through mist descry,
Dullness is ever apt to magnify.

Some foreign writers, some our own despise,
The ancients only, or the moderns prize.
Thus wit, like faith, by each man is applied
To one small sect, and all are damned beside.
Meanly they seek the blessing to confine,
And force that sun but on a part to shine,
Which not alone the southern wit sublimes,
But ripens spirits in cold northern climes.
Which from the first has shone on ages past,
Enlights the present, and shall warm the last,
Though each may feel increases and decays,
And see now clearer and now darker days.
Regard not then if wit be old or new,
But blame the false, and value still the true.

Some ne'er advance a judgment of their own,
But catch the spreading notion of the town,
They reason and conclude by precedent,
And own stale nonsense which they ne'er invent.
Some judge of authors names not works, and then
Nor praise nor blame the writing, but the men.
Of all this servile herd the worst is he
That in proud dullness joins with quality
A constant critic at the great man's board,
To fetch and carry nonsense for my lord
What woful stuff this madrigal would be,
In some starved hackney sonnetteer, or me!
But let a lord once own the happy lines,
How the wit brightens! how the style refines!
Before his sacred name flies every fault,
And each exalted stanza teems with thought!

The vulgar thus through imitation err;
As oft the learned by being singular.
So much they scorn the crowd that if the throng
By chance go right they purposely go wrong:
So schismatics the plain believers quit,
And are but damned for having too much wit.
Some praise at morning what they blame at night,
But always think the last opinion right.
A muse by these is like a mistress used,
This hour she's idolized, the next abused;
While their weak heads, like towns unfortified,
'Twixt sense and nonsense daily change their side.
Ask them the cause, they're wiser still they say;
And still to-morrow's wiser than to-day.
We think our fathers fools, so wise we grow;
Our wiser sons, no doubt, will think us so.
Once school-divines this zealous isle o'erspread.
Who knew most sentences was deepest read,
Faith, Gospel, all, seemed made to be disputed,
And none had sense enough to be confuted:
Scotists and Thomists now in peace remain,
Amidst their kindred cobwebs in Duck Lane.
If faith itself has different dresses worn,
What wonder modes in wit should take their turn?
Oft, leaving what is natural and fit,
The current folly proves the ready wit;
And authors think their reputation safe,
Which lives as long as fools are pleased to laugh.

Some valuing those of their own side or mind,
Still make themselves the measure of mankind:
Fondly we think we honor merit then,
When we but praise ourselves in other men.
Parties in wit attend on those of state,
And public faction doubles private hate.
Pride, malice, folly against Dryden rose,
In various shapes of parsons, critics, beaux;
But sense survived, when merry jests were past;
For rising merit will buoy up at last.
Might he return, and bless once more our eyes,
New Blackmores and new Millbourns must arise:
Nay, should great Homer lift his awful head,
Zoilus again would start up from the dead
Envy will merit, as its shade, pursue,
But like a shadow, proves the substance true:
For envied wit, like Sol eclipsed, makes known
The opposing body's grossness, not its own.
When first that sun too powerful beams displays,
It draws up vapors which obscure its rays,
But even those clouds at last adorn its way
Reflect new glories and augment the day

Be thou the first true merit to befriend
His praise is lost who stays till all commend
Short is the date alas! of modern rhymes
And 'tis but just to let them live betimes
No longer now that golden age appears
When patriarch wits survived a thousand years
Now length of fame (our second life) is lost
And bare threescore is all even that can boast,
Our sons their fathers failing language see
And such as Chaucer is shall Dryden be
So when the faithful pencil has designed
Some bright idea of the master's mind
Where a new world leaps out at his command
And ready nature waits upon his hand
When the ripe colors soften and unite
And sweetly melt into just shade and light
When mellowing years their full perfection give
And each bold figure just begins to live
The treacherous colors the fair art betray
And all the bright creation fades away!

Unhappy wit, like most mistaken things
Atones not for that envy which it brings
In youth alone its empty praise we boast
But soon the short lived vanity is lost.
Like some fair flower the early spring supplies
That gayly blooms but even in blooming dies
What is this wit, which must our cares employ?
The owner's wife that other men enjoy
Then most our trouble still when most admired
And still the more we give the more required
Whose fame with pains we guard, but lose with ease,
Sure some to vex, but never all to please,
'Tis what the vicious fear, the virtuous shun,
By fools 'tis hated, and by knaves undone!

If wit so much from ignorance undergo,
Ah! let not learning too commence its foe!
Of old, those met rewards who could excel,
And such were praised who but endeavored well:
Though triumphs were to generals only due,
Crowns were reserved to grace the soldiers too.
Now they who reach Parnassus' lofty crown,
Employ their pains to spurn some others down;
And, while self-love each jealous writer rules,
Contending wits become the sport of fools:
But still the worst with most regret commend,
For each ill author is as bad a friend
To what base ends, and by what abject ways,
Are mortals urged, through sacred lust of praise!
Ah, ne'er so dire a thirst of glory boast,
Nor in the critic let the man be lost
Good-nature and good sense must ever join;
To err is human, to forgive, divine.

But if in noble minds some dregs remain,
Not yet purged off, of spleen and sour disdain;
Discharge that rage on more provoking crimes,
Nor fear a dearth in these flagitious times.
No pardon vile obscenity should find,
Though wit and art conspire to move your mind;
But dullness with obscenity must prove
As shameful sure as impotence in love.
In the fat age of pleasure, wealth, and ease,
Sprung the rank weed, and thrived with large increase:
When love was all an easy monarch's care,
Seldom at council, never in a war
Jilts ruled the state, and statesmen farces writ;
Nay, wits had pensions, and young lords had wit:
The fair sat panting at a courtier's play,
And not a mask went unimproved away:
The modest fan was lifted up no more,
And virgins smiled at what they blushed before.
The following license of a foreign reign,
Did all the dregs of bold Socinus drain,
Then unbelieving priests reformed the nation.
And taught more pleasant methods of salvation;
Where Heaven's free subjects might their rights dispute,
Lest God himself should seem too absolute:
Pulpits their sacred satire learned to spare,
And vice admired to find a flatterer there!
Encouraged thus, wit's Titans braved the skies,
And the press groaned with licensed blasphemies.
These monsters, critics! with your darts engage,
Here point your thunder, and exhaust your rage!
Yet shun their fault, who, scandalously nice,
Will needs mistake an author into vice;
All seems infected that the infected spy,
As all looks yellow to the jaundiced eye.

Learn, then, what morals critics ought to show,
For 'tis but half a judge's task to know.
'Tis not enough, taste, judgment, learning, join;
In all you speak, let truth and candor shine:
That not alone what to your sense is due
All may allow, but seek your friendship too.

Be silent always, when you doubt your sense;
And speak, though sure, with seeming diffidence:
Some positive persisting fops we know,
Who, if once wrong will needs be always so;
But you, with pleasure, own your errors past,
And make each day a critique on the last.

'Tis not enough your counsel still be true;
Blunt truths more mischief than nice falsehoods do;
Men must be taught as if you taught them not,
And things unknown proposed as things forgot.
Without good breeding truth is disapproved;
That only makes superior sense beloved.

Be niggards of advice on no pretense;
For the worst avarice is that of sense
With mean complacence, ne'er betray your trust,
Nor be so civil as to prove unjust
Fear not the anger of the wise to raise,
Those best can bear reproof who merit praise.

'Twere well might critics still this freedom take,
But Appius reddens at each word you speak,
And stares, tremendous with a threatening eye,
Like some fierce tyrant in old tapestry
Fear most to tax an honorable fool
Whose right it is uncensured to be dull
Such, without wit are poets when they please,
As without learning they can take degrees
Leave dangerous truths to unsuccessful satires,
And flattery to fulsome dedicators
Whom, when they praise, the world believes no more,
Than when they promise to give scribbling o'er.

'Tis best sometimes your censure to restrain,
And charitably let the dull be vain
Your silence there is better than your spite,
For who can rail so long as they can write?
Still humming on, their drowsy course they keep,
And lashed so long like tops are lashed asleep.
False steps but help them to renew the race,
As after stumbling, jades will mend their pace.
What crowds of these, impenitently bold,
In sounds and jingling syllables grown old,
Still run on poets in a raging vein,
Even to the dregs and squeezing of the brain;
Strain out the last dull droppings of their sense,
And rhyme with all the rage of impotence!

Such shameless bards we have, and yet, 'tis true,
There are as mad abandoned critics, too
The bookful blockhead ignorantly read,
With loads of learned lumber in his head,
With his own tongue still edifies his ears,
And always listening to himself appears
All books he reads and all he reads assails
From Dryden's Fables down to Durfey's Tales
With him most authors steal their works or buy;
Garth did not write his own Dispensary
Name a new play, and he's the poets friend
Nay, showed his faults--but when would poets mend?
No place so sacred from such fops is barred,
Nor is Paul's Church more safe than Paul's Churchyard:
Nay, fly to altars; there they'll talk you dead,
For fools rush in where angels fear to tread
Distrustful sense with modest caution speaks,
It still looks home, and short excursions makes;
But rattling nonsense in full volleys breaks,
And, never shocked, and never turned aside.
Bursts out, resistless, with a thundering tide,

But where's the man who counsel can bestow,
Still pleased to teach, and yet not proud to know?
Unbiased, or by favor, or in spite,
Not dully prepossessed, nor blindly right;
Though learned, well-bred, and though well bred, sincere,
Modestly bold, and humanly severe,
Who to a friend his faults can freely show,
And gladly praise the merit of a foe?
Blessed with a taste exact, yet unconfined;
A knowledge both of books and human kind;
Generous converse, a soul exempt from pride;
And love to praise, with reason on his side?

Such once were critics such the happy few,
Athens and Rome in better ages knew.
The mighty Stagirite first left the shore,
Spread all his sails, and durst the deeps explore;
He steered securely, and discovered far,
Led by the light of the Maeonian star.
Poets, a race long unconfined and free,
Still fond and proud of savage liberty,
Received his laws, and stood convinced 'twas fit,
Who conquered nature, should preside o'er wit.

Horace still charms with graceful negligence,
And without method talks us into sense;
Will like a friend familiarly convey
The truest notions in the easiest way.
He who supreme in judgment as in wit,
Might boldly censure, as he boldly writ,
Yet judged with coolness though he sung with fire;
His precepts teach but what his works inspire
Our critics take a contrary extreme
They judge with fury, but they write with phlegm:
Nor suffers Horace more in wrong translations
By wits than critics in as wrong quotations.

See Dionysius Homer's thoughts refine,
And call new beauties forth from every line!

Fancy and art in gay Petronius please,
The scholar's learning with the courtier's ease.

In grave Quintilian's copious work we find
The justest rules and clearest method joined:
Thus useful arms in magazines we place,
All ranged in order, and disposed with grace,
But less to please the eye, than arm the hand,
Still fit for use, and ready at command.

Thee bold Longinus! all the Nine inspire,
And bless their critic with a poet's fire.
An ardent judge, who, zealous in his trust,
With warmth gives sentence, yet is always just:
Whose own example strengthens all his laws;
And is himself that great sublime he draws.

Thus long succeeding critics justly reigned,
License repressed, and useful laws ordained.
Learning and Rome alike in empire grew;
And arts still followed where her eagles flew,
From the same foes at last, both felt their doom,
And the same age saw learning fall, and Rome.
With tyranny then superstition joined
As that the body, this enslaved the mind;
Much was believed but little understood,
And to be dull was construed to be good;
A second deluge learning thus o'errun,
And the monks finished what the Goths begun.

At length Erasmus, that great injured name
(The glory of the priesthood and the shame!)
Stemmed the wild torrent of a barbarous age,
And drove those holy Vandals off the stage.

But see! each muse, in Leo's golden days,
Starts from her trance and trims her withered bays,
Rome's ancient genius o'er its ruins spread
Shakes off the dust, and rears his reverent head
Then sculpture and her sister arts revive,
Stones leaped to form, and rocks began to live;
With sweeter notes each rising temple rung,
A Raphael painted, and a Vida sung
Immortal Vida! on whose honored brow
The poets bays and critic's ivy grow
Cremona now shall ever boast thy name
As next in place to Mantua, next in fame!

But soon by impious arms from Latium chased,
Their ancient bounds the banished muses passed.
Thence arts o'er all the northern world advance,
But critic-learning flourished most in France,
The rules a nation born to serve, obeys;
And Boileau still in right of Horace sways
But we, brave Britons, foreign laws despised,
And kept unconquered and uncivilized,
Fierce for the liberties of wit and bold,
We still defied the Romans as of old.
Yet some there were, among the sounder few
Of those who less presumed and better knew,
Who durst assert the juster ancient cause,
And here restored wit's fundamental laws.
Such was the muse, whose rule and practice tell
"Nature's chief masterpiece is writing well."
Such was Roscommon, not more learned than good,
With manners generous as his noble blood,
To him the wit of Greece and Rome was known,
And every author's merit, but his own
Such late was Walsh--the muse's judge and friend,
Who justly knew to blame or to commend,
To failings mild, but zealous for desert,
The clearest head, and the sincerest heart,
This humble praise, lamented shade! receive,
This praise at least a grateful muse may give.
The muse whose early voice you taught to sing
Prescribed her heights and pruned her tender wing,
(Her guide now lost) no more attempts to rise,
But in low numbers short excursions tries,
Content if hence the unlearned their wants may view,
The learned reflect on what before they knew
Careless of censure, nor too fond of fame,
Still pleased to praise, yet not afraid to blame,
Averse alike to flatter, or offend,
Not free from faults, nor yet too vain to mend.

**
The Rape of the Lock
***

What dire offence from am'rous causes springs,
What mighty contests rise from trivial things,
I sing--This verse to CARYL, Muse! is due:
This, ev'n Belinda may vouchsafe to view:
Slight is the subject, but not so the praise,
If She inspire, and He approve my lays.

Say what strange motive, Goddess! could compel
A well-bred Lord t' assault a gentle Belle?
O say what stranger cause, yet unexplor'd,
Could make a gentle Belle reject a Lord?
In tasks so bold, can little men engage,
And in soft bosoms dwells such mighty Rage?

Sol thro' white curtains shot a tim'rous ray,
And oped those eyes that must eclipse the day:
Now lap-dogs give themselves the rousing shake,
And sleepless lovers, just at twelve, awake:
Thrice rung the bell, the slipper knock'd the ground,
And the press'd watch return'd a silver sound.
Belinda still her downy pillow prest,
Her guardian SYLPH prolong'd the balmy rest:
'Twas He had summon'd to her silent bed
The morning-dream that hover'd o'er her head;
A Youth more glitt'ring than a Birth-night Beau,
(That ev'n in slumber caus'd her cheek to glow)
Seem'd to her ear his winning lips to lay,
And thus in whispers said, or seem'd to say.

Fairest of mortals, thou distinguish'd care
Of thousand bright Inhabitants of Air!
If e'er one vision touch.'d thy infant thought,
Of all the Nurse and all the Priest have taught;
Of airy Elves by moonlight shadows seen,
The silver token, and the circled green,
Or virgins visited by Angel-pow'rs,
With golden crowns and wreaths of heav'nly flow'rs;
Hear and believe! thy own importance know,
Nor bound thy narrow views to things below.
Some secret truths, from learned pride conceal'd,
To Maids alone and Children are reveal'd:
What tho' no credit doubting Wits may give?
The Fair and Innocent shall still believe.
Know, then, unnumber'd Spirits round thee fly,
The light Militia of the lower sky:
These, tho' unseen, are ever on the wing,
Hang o'er the Box, and hover round the Ring.
Think what an equipage thou hast in Air,
And view with scorn two Pages and a Chair.
As now your own, our beings were of old,
And once inclos'd in Woman's beauteous mould;
Thence, by a soft transition, we repair
From earthly Vehicles to these of air.
Think not, when Woman's transient breath is fled
That all her vanities at once are dead;
Succeeding vanities she still regards,
And tho' she plays no more, o'erlooks the cards.
Her joy in gilded Chariots, when alive,
And love of Ombre, after death survive.
For when the Fair in all their pride expire,
To their first Elements their Souls retire:
The Sprites of fiery Termagants in Flame
Mount up, and take a Salamander's name.
Soft yielding minds to Water glide away,
And sip, with Nymphs, their elemental Tea.
The graver Prude sinks downward to a Gnome,
In search of mischief still on Earth to roam.
The light Coquettes in Sylphs aloft repair,
And sport and flutter in the fields of Air.

"Know further yet; whoever fair and chaste
Rejects mankind, is by some Sylph embrac'd:
For Spirits, freed from mortal laws, with ease
Assume what sexes and what shapes they please.
What guards the purity of melting Maids,
In courtly balls, and midnight masquerades,
Safe from the treach'rous friend, the daring spark,
The glance by day, the whisper in the dark,
When kind occasion prompts their warm desires,
When music softens, and when dancing fires?
'Tis but their Sylph, the wise Celestials know,
Tho' Honour is the word with Men below.

Some nymphs there are, too conscious of their face,
For life predestin'd to the Gnomes' embrace.
These swell their prospects and exalt their pride,
When offers are disdain'd, and love deny'd:
Then gay Ideas crowd the vacant brain,
While Peers, and Dukes, and all their sweeping train,
And Garters, Stars, and Coronets appear,
And in soft sounds, Your Grace salutes their ear.
'T is these that early taint the female soul,
Instruct the eyes of young Coquettes to roll,
Teach Infant-cheeks a bidden blush to know,
And little hearts to flutter at a Beau.

Oft, when the world imagine women stray,
The Sylphs thro' mystic mazes guide their way,
Thro' all the giddy circle they pursue,
And old impertinence expel by new.
What tender maid but must a victim fall
To one man's treat, but for another's ball?
When Florio speaks what virgin could withstand,
If gentle Damon did not squeeze her hand?
With varying vanities, from ev'ry part,
They shift the moving Toyshop of their heart;
Where wigs with wigs, with sword-knots sword-knots strive,
Beaux banish beaux, and coaches coaches drive.
This erring mortals Levity may call;
Oh blind to truth! the Sylphs contrive it all.

Of these am I, who thy protection claim,
A watchful sprite, and Ariel is my name.
Late, as I rang'd the crystal wilds of air,
In the clear Mirror of thy ruling Star
I saw, alas! some dread event impend,
Ere to the main this morning sun descend,
But heav'n reveals not what, or how, or where:
Warn'd by the Sylph, oh pious maid, beware!
This to disclose is all thy guardian can:
Beware of all, but most beware of Man!"

He said; when Shock, who thought she slept too long,
Leap'd up, and wak'd his mistress with his tongue.
'T was then, Belinda, if report say true,
Thy eyes first open'd on a Billet-doux;
Wounds, Charms, and Ardors were no sooner read,
But all the Vision vanish'd from thy head.

And now, unveil'd, the Toilet stands display'd,
Each silver Vase in mystic order laid.
First, rob'd in white, the Nymph intent adores,
With head uncover'd, the Cosmetic pow'rs.
A heav'nly image in the glass appears,
To that she bends, to that her eyes she rears;
Th' inferior Priestess, at her altar's side,
Trembling begins the sacred rites of Pride.
Unnumber'd treasures ope at once, and here
The various off'rings of the world appear;
From each she nicely culls with curious toil,
And decks the Goddess with the glitt'ring spoil.
This casket India's glowing gems unlocks,
And all Arabia breathes from yonder box.
The Tortoise here and Elephant unite,
Transformed to combs, the speckled, and the white.
Here files of pins extend their shining rows,
Puffs, Powders, Patches, Bibles, Billet-doux.
Now awful Beauty puts on all its arms;
The fair each moment rises in her charms,
Repairs her smiles, awakens ev'ry grace,
And calls forth all the wonders of her face;
Sees by degrees a purer blush arise,
And keener lightnings quicken in her eyes.
The busy Sylphs surround their darling care,
These set the head, and those divide the hair,
Some fold the sleeve, whilst others plait the gown:
And Betty's prais'd for labours not her own.

Not with more glories, in th' etherial plain,
The Sun first rises o'er the purpled main,
Than, issuing forth, the rival of his beams
Launch'd on the bosom of the silver Thames.
Fair Nymphs, and well-drest Youths around her shone.
But ev'ry eye was fix'd on her alone.
On her white breast a sparkling Cross she wore,
Which Jews might kiss, and Infidels adore.
Her lively looks a sprightly mind disclose,
Quick as her eyes, and as unfix'd as those:
Favours to none, to all she smiles extends;
Oft she rejects, but never once offends.
Bright as the sun, her eyes the gazers strike,
And, like the sun, they shine on all alike.
Yet graceful ease, and sweetness void of pride,
Might hide her faults, if Belles had faults to hide:
If to her share some female errors fall,
Look on her face, and you'll forget 'em all.

This Nymph, to the destruction of mankind,
Nourish'd two Locks, which graceful hung behind
In equal curls, and well conspir'd to deck
With shining ringlets the smooth iv'ry neck.
Love in these labyrinths his slaves detains,
And mighty hearts are held in slender chains.
With hairy springes we the birds betray,
Slight lines of hair surprise the finny prey,
Fair tresses man's imperial race ensnare,
And beauty draws us with a single hair.

Th' advent'rous Baron the bright locks admir'd;
He saw, he wish'd, and to the prize aspir'd.
Resolv'd to win, he meditates the way,
By force to ravish, or by fraud betray;
For when success a Lover's toil attends,
Few ask, if fraud or force attain'd his ends.

For this, ere Phoebus rose, he had implor'd
Propitious heav'n, and ev'ry pow'r ador'd,
But chiefly Love--to Love an Altar built,
Of twelve vast French Romances, neatly gilt.
There lay three garters, half a pair of gloves;
And all the trophies of his former loves;
With tender Billet-doux he lights the pyre,
And breathes three am'rous sighs to raise the fire.
Then prostrate falls, and begs with ardent eyes
Soon to obtain, and long possess the prize:
The pow'rs gave ear, and granted half his pray'r,
The rest, the winds dispers'd in empty air.

But now secure the painted vessel glides,
The sun-beams trembling on the floating tides:
While melting music steals upon the sky,
And soften'd sounds along the waters die;
Smooth flow the waves, the Zephyrs gently play,
Belinda smil'd, and all the world was gay.
All but the Sylph--with careful thoughts opprest,
Th' impending woe sat heavy on his breast.
He summons strait his Denizens of air;
The lucid squadrons round the sails repair:
Soft o'er the shrouds arial whispers breathe,
That seem'd but Zephyrs to the train beneath.
Some to the sun their insect-wings unfold,
Waft on the breeze, or sink in clouds of gold;
Transparent forms, too fine for mortal sight,
Their fluid bodies half dissolv'd in light,
Loose to the wind their airy garments flew,
Thin glitt'ring textures of the filmy dew,
Dipt in the richest tincture of the skies,
Where light disports in ever-mingling dyes,
While ev'ry beam new transient colours flings,
Colours that change whene'er they wave their wings.
Amid the circle, on the gilded mast,
Superior by the head, was Ariel plac'd;
His purple pinions op'ning to the sun,
He rais'd his azure wand, and thus begun.

Ye Sylphs and Sylphids, to your chief give ear!
Fays, Fairies, Genii, Elves, and Dmons, hear!
Ye know the spheres and various tasks assign'd
By laws eternal to th' arial kind.
Some in the fields of purest ther play,
And bask and whiten in the blaze of day.
Some guide the course of wand'ring orbs on high,
Or roll the planets thro' the boundless sky.
Some less refin'd, beneath the moon's pale light
Pursue the stars that shoot athwart the night,
Or suck the mists in grosser air below,
Or dip their pinions in the painted bow,
Or brew fierce tempests on the wintry main,
Or o'er the glebe distil the kindly rain.
Others on earth o'er human race preside,
Watch all their ways, and all their actions guide:
Of these the chief the care of Nations own,
And guard with Arms divine the British Throne.

Our humbler province is to tend the Fair,
Not a less pleasing, tho' less glorious care;
To save the powder from too rude a gale,
Nor let th' imprison'd-essences exhale;
To draw fresh colours from the vernal flow'rs;
To steal from rainbows e'er they drop in show'rs
A brighter wash; to curl their waving hairs,
Assist their blushes, and inspire their airs;
Nay oft, in dreams, invention we bestow,
To change a Flounce, or add a Furbelow.

This day, black Omens threat the brightest Fair,
That e'er deserv'd a watchful spirit's care;
Some dire disaster, or by force, or slight;
But what, or where, the fates have wrapt in night.
Whether the nymph shall break Diana's law,
Or some frail China jar receive a flaw;
Or stain her honour or her new brocade;
Forget her pray'rs, or miss a masquerade;
Or lose her heart, or necklace, at a ball;
Or whether Heav'n has doom'd that Shock must fall.
Haste, then, ye spirits! to your charge repair:
The flutt'ring fan be Zephyretta's care;
The drops to thee, Brillante, we consign;
And, Momentilla, let the watch be thine;
Do thou, Crispissa, tend her fav'rite Lock;
Ariel himself shall be the guard of Shock.

To fifty chosen Sylphs, of special note,
We trust th' important charge, the Petticoat:
Oft have we known that seven-fold fence to fail,
Tho' stiff with hoops, and arm'd with ribs of whale;
Form a strong line about the silver bound,
And guard the wide circumference around.

Whatever spirit, careless of his charge,
His post neglects, or leaves the fair at large,
Shall feel sharp vengeance soon o'ertake his sins,
Be stopp'd in vials, or transfix'd with pins;
Or plung'd in lakes of bitter washes lie,
Or wedg'd whole ages in a bodkin's eye:
Gums and Pomatums shall his flight restrain,
While clogg'd he beats his silken wings in vain;
Or Alum styptics with contracting pow'r
Shrink his thin essence like a rivel'd flow'r:
Or, as Ixion fix'd, the wretch shall feel
The giddy motion of the whirling Mill,
In fumes of burning Chocolate shall glow,
And tremble at the sea that froths below!

He spoke; the spirits from the sails descend;
Some, orb in orb, around the nymph extend;
Some thrid the mazy ringlets of her hair;
Some hang upon the pendants of her ear:
With beating hearts the dire event they wait,
Anxious, and trembling for the birth of Fate.

Close by those meads, for ever crown'd with flow'rs,
Where Thames with pride surveys his rising tow'rs,
There stands a structure of majestic frame,
Which from the neighb'ring Hampton takes its name.
Here Britain's statesmen oft the fall foredoom
Of foreign Tyrants and of Nymphs at home;
Here thou, great ANNA! whom three realms obey.
Dost sometimes counsel take--and sometimes Tea.

Hither the heroes and the nymphs resort,
To taste awhile the pleasures of a Court;
In various talk th' instructive hours they past,
Who gave the ball, or paid the visit last;
One speaks the glory of the British Queen,
And one describes a charming Indian screen;
A third interprets motions, looks, and eyes;
At ev'ry word a reputation dies.
Snuff, or the fan, supply each pause of chat,
With singing, laughing, ogling, and _all that_.

Mean while, declining from the noon of day,
The sun obliquely shoots his burning ray;
The hungry Judges soon the sentence sign,
And wretches hang that jury-men may dine;
The merchant from th' Exchange returns in peace,
And the long labours of the Toilet cease.
Belinda now, whom thirst of fame invites,
Burns to encounter two advent'rous Knights,
At Ombre singly to decide their doom;
And swells her breast with conquests yet to come.
Straight the three bands prepare in arms to join,
Each band the number of the sacred nine.

Soon as she spreads her hand, th' arial guard
Descend, and sit on each important card:
First Ariel perch'd upon a Matadore,
Then each, according to the rank they bore;
For Sylphs, yet mindful of their ancient race,
Are, as when women, wondrous fond of place.
Behold, four Kings in majesty rever'd,
With hoary whiskers and a forky beard;
And four fair Queens whose hands sustain a flow'r,
Th' expressive emblem of their softer pow'r;
Four Knaves in garbs succinct, a trusty band,
Caps on their heads, and halberts in their hand;
And particolour'd troops, a shining train,
Draw forth to combat on the velvet plain.

The skilful Nymph reviews her force with care:
Let Spades be trumps! she said, and trumps they were.

Now move to war her sable Matadores,
In show like leaders of the swarthy Moors.
Spadillio first, unconquerable Lord!
Led off two captive trumps, and swept the board.
As many more Manillio forc'd to yield,
And march'd a victor from the verdant field.
Him Basto follow'd, but his fate more hard
Gain'd but one trump and one Plebeian card.
With his broad sabre next, a chief in years,
The hoary Majesty of Spades appears,
Puts forth one manly leg, to sight reveal'd,
The rest, his many-colour'd robe conceal'd.
The rebel Knave, who dares his prince engage,
Proves the just victim of his royal rage.
Ev'n mighty Pam, that Kings and Queens o'erthrew
And mow'd down armies in the fights of Lu,
Sad chance of war! now destitute of aid,
Falls undistinguish'd by the victor spade!

Thus far both armies to Belinda yield;
Now to the Baron fate inclines the field.
His warlike Amazon her host invades,
Th' imperial consort of the crown of Spades.
The Club's black Tyrant first her victim dy'd,
Spite of his haughty mien, and barb'rous pride:
What boots the regal circle on his head,
His giant limbs, in state unwieldy spread;
That long behind he trails his pompous robe,
And, of all monarchs, only grasps the globe?

The Baron now his Diamonds pours apace;
Th' embroider'd King who shows but half his face,
And his refulgent Queen, with pow'rs combin'd
Of broken troops an easy conquest find.
Clubs, Diamonds, Hearts, in wild disorder seen,
With throngs promiscuous strow the level green.
Thus when dispers'd a routed army runs,
Of Asia's troops, and Afric's sable sons,
With like confusion different nations fly,
Of various habit, and of various dye,
The pierc'd battalions dis-united fall,
In heaps on heaps; one fate o'erwhelms them all.

The Knave of Diamonds tries his wily arts,
And wins (oh shameful chance!) the Queen of Hearts.
At this, the blood the virgin's cheek forsook,
A livid paleness spreads o'er all her look;
She sees, and trembles at th' approaching ill,
Just in the jaws of ruin, and Codille.
And now (as oft in some distemper'd State)
On one nice Trick depends the gen'ral fate.
An Ace of Hearts steps forth: The King unseen
Lurk'd in her hand, and mourn'd his captive Queen:
He springs to Vengeance with an eager pace,
And falls like thunder on the prostrate Ace.
The nymph exulting fills with shouts the sky;
The walls, the woods, and long canals reply.

Oh thoughtless mortals! ever blind to fate,
Too soon dejected, and too soon elate.
Sudden, these honours shall be snatch'd away,
And curs'd for ever this victorious day.

For lo! the board with cups and spoons is crown'd,
The berries crackle, and the mill turns round;
On shining Altars of Japan they raise
The silver lamp; the fiery spirits blaze:
From silver spouts the grateful liquors glide,
While China's earth receives the smoking tide:
At once they gratify their scent and taste,
And frequent cups prolong the rich repast.
Straight hover round the Fair her airy band;
Some, as she sipp'd, the fuming liquor fann'd,
Some o'er her lap their careful plumes display'd,
Trembling, and conscious of the rich brocade.
Coffee, (which makes the politician wise,
And see thro' all things with his half-shut eyes)
Sent up in vapours to the Baron's brain
New Stratagems, the radiant Lock to gain.
Ah cease, rash youth! desist ere't is too late,
Fear the just Gods, and think of Scylla's Fate!
Chang'd to a bird, and sent to flit in air,
She dearly pays for Nisus' injur'd hair!

But when to mischief mortals bend their will,
How soon they find fit instruments of ill!
Just then, Clarissa drew with tempting grace
A two-edg'd weapon from her shining case:
So Ladies in Romance assist their Knight,
Present the spear, and arm him for the fight.
He takes the gift with rev'rence, and extends
The little engine on his fingers' ends;
This just behind Belinda's neck he spread,
As o'er the fragrant steams she bends her head.
Swift to the Lock a thousand Sprites repair,
A thousand wings, by turns, blow back the hair;
And thrice they twitch'd the diamond in her ear;
Thrice she look'd back, and thrice the foe drew near.
Just in that instant, anxious Ariel sought
The close recesses of the Virgin's thought;
As on the nosegay in her breast reclin'd,
He watch'd th' Ideas rising in her mind,
Sudden he view'd, in spite of all her art,
An earthly Lover lurking at her heart.
Amaz'd, confus'd, he found his pow'r expir'd,
Resign'd to fate, and with a sigh retir'd.

The Peer now spreads the glitt'ring Forfex wide,
T' inclose the Lock; now joins it, to divide.
Ev'n then, before the fatal engine clos'd,
A wretched Sylph too fondly interpos'd;
Fate urg'd the shears, and cut the Sylph in twain,
(But airy substance soon unites again)
The meeting points the sacred hair dissever
From the fair head, for ever, and for ever!

Then flash'd the living lightning from her eyes,
And screams of horror rend th' affrighted skies.
Not louder shrieks to pitying heav'n are cast,
When husbands, or when lapdogs breathe their last;
Or when rich China vessels fall'n from high,
In glitt'ring dust and painted fragments lie!

Let wreaths of triumph now my temples twine
(The victor cry'd) the glorious Prize is mine!
While fish in streams, or birds delight in air,
Or in a coach and six the British Fair,
As long as Atalantis shall be read,
Or the small pillow grace a Lady's bed,
While visits shall be paid on solemn days,
When num'rous wax-lights in bright order blaze,
While nymphs take treats, or assignations give,
So long my honour, name, and praise shall live!
What Time would spare, from Steel receives its date,
And monuments, like men, submit to fate!
Steel could the labour of the Gods destroy,
And strike to dust th' imperial tow'rs of Troy;
Steel could the works of mortal pride confound,
And hew triumphal arches to the ground.
What wonder then, fair nymph! thy hairs should feel,
The conqu'ring force of unresisted steel?

But anxious cares the pensive nymph oppress'd,
And secret passions labour'd in her breast.
Not youthful kings in battle seiz'd alive,
Not scornful virgins who their charms survive,
Not ardent lovers robb'd of all their bliss,
Not ancient ladies when refus'd a kiss,
Not tyrants fierce that unrepenting die,
Not Cynthia when her manteau's pinn'd awry,
E'er felt such rage, resentment, and despair,
As thou, sad Virgin! for thy ravish'd Hair.

For, that sad moment, when the Sylphs withdrew
And Ariel weeping from Belinda flew,
Umbriel, a dusky, melancholy sprite,
As ever sully'd the fair face of light,
Down to the central earth, his proper scene,
Repair'd to search the gloomy Cave of Spleen.

Swift on his sooty pinions flits the Gnome,
And in a vapour reach'd the dismal dome.
No cheerful breeze this sullen region knows,
The dreaded East is all the wind that blows.
Here in a grotto, shelter'd close from air,
And screen'd in shades from day's detested glare,
She sighs for ever on her pensive bed,
Pain at her side, and Megrim at her head.

Two handmaids wait the throne: alike in place,
But diff'ring far in figure and in face.
Here stood Ill-nature like an ancient maid,
Her wrinkled form in black and white array'd;
With store of pray'rs, for mornings, nights, and noons,
Her hand is fill'd; her bosom with lampoons.

There Affectation, with a sickly mien,
Shows in her cheek the roses of eighteen,
Practis'd to lisp, and hang the head aside.
Faints into airs, and languishes with pride,
On the rich quilt sinks with becoming woe,
Wrapt in a gown, for sickness, and for show.
The fair ones feel such maladies as these,
When each new night-dress gives a new disease.

A constant Vapour o'er the palace flies;
Strange phantoms rising as the mists arise;
Dreadful, as hermit's dreams in haunted shades,
Or bright, as visions of expiring maids.
Now glaring fiends, and snakes on rolling spires,
Pale spectres, gaping tombs, and purple fires:
Now lakes of liquid gold, Elysian scenes,
And crystal domes, and angels in machines.

Unnumber'd throngs on every side are seen,
Of bodies chang'd to various forms by Spleen.
Here living Tea-pots stand, one arm held out,
One bent; the handle this, and that the spout:
A Pipkin there, like Homer's Tripod walks;
Here sighs a Jar, and there a Goose-pie talks;
Men prove with child, as pow'rful fancy works,
And maids turn'd bottles, call aloud for corks.

Safe past the Gnome thro' this fantastic band,
A branch of healing Spleenwort in his hand.
Then thus address'd the pow'r: "Hail, wayward Queen!
Who rule the sex to fifty from fifteen:
Parent of vapours and of female wit,
Who give th' hysteric, or poetic fit,
On various tempers act by various ways,
Make some take physic, others scribble plays;
Who cause the proud their visits to delay,
And send the godly in a pet to pray.
A nymph there is, that all thy pow'r disdains,
And thousands more in equal mirth maintains.
But oh! if e'er thy Gnome could spoil a grace,
Or raise a pimple on a beauteous face,
Like Citron-waters matrons cheeks inflame,
Or change complexions at a losing game;
If e'er with airy horns I planted heads,
Or rumpled petticoats, or tumbled beds,
Or caus'd suspicion when no soul was rude,
Or discompos'd the head-dress of a Prude,
Or e'er to costive lap-dog gave disease,
Which not the tears of brightest eyes could ease:
Hear me, and touch Belinda with chagrin,
That single act gives half the world the spleen."

The Goddess with a discontented air
Seems to reject him, tho' she grants his pray'r.
A wond'rous Bag with both her hands she binds,
Like that where once Ulysses held the winds;
There she collects the force of female lungs,
Sighs, sobs, and passions, and the war of tongues.
A Vial next she fills with fainting fears,
Soft sorrows, melting griefs, and flowing tears.
The Gnome rejoicing bears her gifts away,
Spreads his black wings, and slowly mounts to day.

Sunk in Thalestris' arms the nymph he found,
Her eyes dejected and her hair unbound.
Full o'er their heads the swelling bag he rent,
And all the Furies issu'd at the vent.
Belinda burns with more than mortal ire,
And fierce Thalestris fans the rising fire.
"O wretched maid!" she spread her hands, and cry'd,
(While Hampton's echoes, "Wretched maid!" reply'd)
"Was it for this you took such constant care
The bodkin, comb, and essence to prepare?
For this your locks in paper durance bound,
For this with tort'ring irons wreath'd around?
For this with fillets strain'd your tender head,
And bravely bore the double loads of lead?
Gods! shall the ravisher display your hair,
While the Fops envy, and the Ladies stare!
Honour forbid! at whose unrivall'd shrine
Ease, pleasure, virtue, all our sex resign.
Methinks already I your tears survey,
Already hear the horrid things they say,
Already see you a degraded toast,
And all your honour in a whisper lost!
How shall I, then, your helpless fame defend?
'T will then be infamy to seem your friend!
And shall this prize, th' inestimable prize,
Expos'd thro' crystal to the gazing eyes,
And heighten'd by the diamond's circling rays,
On that rapacious hand for ever blaze?
Sooner shall grass in Hyde-park Circus grow,
And wits take lodgings in the sound of Bow;
Sooner let earth, air, sea, to Chaos fall,
Men, monkeys, lap-dogs, parrots, perish all!"

She said; then raging to Sir Plume repairs,
And bids her Beau demand the precious hairs;
(Sir Plume of amber snuff-box justly vain,
And the nice conduct of a clouded cane)
With earnest eyes, and round unthinking face,
He first the snuff-box open'd, then the case,
And thus broke out--"My Lord, why, what the devil?
"Z--ds! damn the lock! 'fore Gad, you must be civil!
Plague on't!'t is past a jest--nay prithee, pox!
Give her the hair"--he spoke, and rapp'd his box.

"It grieves me much" (reply'd the Peer again)
"Who speaks so well should ever speak in vain.
But by this Lock, this sacred Lock I swear,
(Which never more shall join its parted hair;
Which never more its honours shall renew,
Clipp'd from the lovely head where late it grew)
That while my nostrils draw the vital air,
This hand, which won it, shall for ever wear."
He spoke, and speaking, in proud triumph spread
The long-contended honours of her head.

But Umbriel, hateful Gnome! forbears not so;
He breaks the Vial whence the sorrows flow.
Then see! the nymph in beauteous grief appears,
Her eyes half-languishing, half-drown'd in tears;
On her heav'd bosom hung her drooping head,
Which, with a sigh, she rais'd; and thus she said.
"For ever curs'd be this detested day,
Which snatch'd my best, my fav'rite curl away!
Happy! ah ten times happy had I been,
If Hampton-Court these eyes had never seen!
Yet am not I the first mistaken maid,
By love of Courts to num'rous ills betray'd.
Oh had I rather un-admir'd remain'd
In some lone isle, or distant Northern land;
Where the gilt Chariot never marks the way,
Where none learn Ombre, none e'er taste Bohea!
There kept my charms conceal'd from mortal eye,
Like roses, that in deserts bloom and die.
What mov'd my mind with youthful Lords to roam?
Oh had I stay'd, and said my pray'rs at home!
'T was this, the morning omens seem'd to tell,
Thrice from my trembling hand the patch-box fell;
The tott'ring China shook without a wind.
Nay, Poll sat mute, and Shock was most unkind!
A Sylph too warn'd me of the threats of fate,
In mystic visions, now believ'd too late!
See the poor remnants of these slighted hairs!
My hands shall rend what ev'n thy rapine spares:
These in two sable ringlets taught to break,
Once gave new beauties to the snowy neck;
The sister-lock now sits uncouth, alone,
And in its fellow's fate foresees its own;
Uncurl'd it hangs, the fatal shears demands,
And tempts once more thy sacrilegious hands.
Oh hadst thou, cruel! been content to seize
Hairs less in sight, or any hairs but these!"

She said: the pitying audience melt in tears.
But Fate and Jove had stopp'd the Baron's ears.
In vain Thalestris with reproach assails,
For who can move when fair Belinda fails?
Not half so fix'd the Trojan could remain,
While Anna begg'd and Dido rag'd in vain.
Then grave Clarissa graceful wav'd her fan;
Silence ensu'd, and thus the nymph began.

"Say why are Beauties prais'd and honour'd most,
The wise man's passion, and the vain man's toast?
Why deck'd with all that land and sea afford,
Why Angels call'd, and Angel-like ador'd?
Why round our coaches crowd the white-glov'd Beaux,
Why bows the side-box from its inmost rows;
How vain are all these glories, all our pains,
Unless good sense preserve what beauty gains:
That men may say, when we the front-box grace:
'Behold the first in virtue as in face!'
Oh! if to dance all night, and dress all day,
Charm'd the small-pox, or chas'd old-age away;
Who would not scorn what housewife's cares produce,
Or who would learn one earthly thing of use?
To patch, nay ogle, might become a Saint,
Nor could it sure be such a sin to paint.
But since, alas! frail beauty must decay,
Curl'd or uncurl'd, since Locks will turn to grey;
Since painted, or not painted, all shall fade,
And she who scorns a man, must die a maid;
What then remains but well our pow'r to use,
And keep good-humour still whate'er we lose?
And trust me, dear! good-humour can prevail,
When airs, and flights, and screams, and scolding fail.
Beauties in vain their pretty eyes may roll;
Charms strike the sight, but merit wins the soul."

So spoke the Dame, but no applause ensu'd;
Belinda frown'd, Thalestris call'd her Prude.
"To arms, to arms!" the fierce Virago cries,
And swift as lightning to the combat flies.
All side in parties, and begin th' attack;
Fans clap, silks rustle, and tough whalebones crack;
Heroes' and Heroines' shouts confus'dly rise,
And bass, and treble voices strike the skies.
No common weapons in their hands are found,
Like Gods they fight, nor dread a mortal wound.

So when bold Homer makes the Gods engage,
And heav'nly breasts with human passions rage;
'Gainst Pallas, Mars; Latona, Hermes arms;
And all Olympus rings with loud alarms:
Jove's thunder roars, heav'n trembles all around,
Blue Neptune storms, the bellowing deeps resound:
Earth shakes her nodding tow'rs, the ground gives way.
And the pale ghosts start at the flash of day!

Triumphant Umbriel on a sconce's height
Clapp'd his glad wings, and sate to view the fight:
Propp'd on the bodkin spears, the Sprites survey
The growing combat, or assist the fray.

While thro' the press enrag'd Thalestris flies,
And scatters death around from both her eyes,
A Beau and Witling perish'd in the throng,
One died in metaphor, and one in song.
"O cruel nymph! a living death I bear,"
Cry'd Dapperwit, and sunk beside his chair.
A mournful glance Sir Fopling upwards cast,
"Those eyes are made so killing"--was his last.
Thus on Mander's flow'ry margin lies
Th' expiring Swan, and as he sings he dies.

When bold Sir Plume had drawn Clarissa down,
Chloe stepp'd in, and kill'd him with a frown;
She smil'd to see the doughty hero slain,
But, at her smile, the Beau reviv'd again.

Now Jove suspends his golden scales in air,
Weighs the Men's wits against the Lady's hair;
The doubtful beam long nods from side to side;
At length the wits mount up, the hairs subside.

See, fierce Belinda on the Baron flies,
With more than usual lightning in her eyes:
Nor fear'd the Chief th' unequal fight to try,
Who sought no more than on his foe to die.
But this bold Lord with manly strength endu'd,
She with one finger and a thumb subdu'd:
Just where the breath of life his nostrils drew,
A charge of Snuff the wily virgin threw;
The Gnomes direct, to ev'ry atom just,
The pungent grains of titillating dust.
Sudden, with starting tears each eye o'erflows,
And the high dome re-echoes to his nose.

Now meet thy fate, incens'd Belinda cry'd,
And drew a deadly bodkin from her side.
(The same, his ancient personage to deck,
Her great great grandsire wore about his neck,
In three seal-rings; which after, melted down,
Form'd a vast buckle for his widow's gown:
Her infant grandame's whistle next it grew,
The bells she jingled, and the whistle blew;
Then in a bodkin grac'd her mother's hairs,
Which long she wore, and now Belinda wears.)

"Boast not my fall" (he cry'd) "insulting foe!
Thou by some other shalt be laid as low,
Nor think, to die dejects my lofty mind:
All that I dread is leaving you behind!
Rather than so, ah let me still survive,
And burn in Cupid's flames--but burn alive."

"Restore the Lock!" she cries; and all around
"Restore the Lock!" the vaulted roofs rebound.
Not fierce Othello in so loud a strain
Roar'd for the handkerchief that caus'd his pain.
But see how oft ambitious aims are cross'd,
And chiefs contend 'till all the prize is lost!
The Lock, obtain'd with guilt, and kept with pain,
In ev'ry place is sought, but sought in vain:
With such a prize no mortal must be blest,
So heav'n decrees! with heav'n who can contest?

Some thought it mounted to the Lunar sphere,
Since all things lost on earth are treasur'd there.
There Hero's wits are kept in pond'rous vases,
And beau's in snuff-boxes and tweezer-cases.
There broken vows and death-bed alms are found,
And lovers' hearts with ends of riband bound,
The courtier's promises, and sick man's pray'rs,
The smiles of harlots, and the tears of heirs,
Cages for gnats, and chains to yoke a flea,
Dry'd butterflies, and tomes of casuistry.

But trust the Muse--she saw it upward rise,
Tho' mark'd by none but quick, poetic eyes:
(So Rome's great founder to the heav'ns withdrew,
To Proculus alone confess'd in view)
A sudden Star, it shot thro' liquid air,
And drew behind a radiant trail of hair.
Not Berenice's Locks first rose so bright,
The heav'ns bespangling with dishevell'd light.
The Sylphs behold it kindling as it flies,
And pleas'd pursue its progress thro' the skies.

This the Beau monde shall from the Mall survey,
And hail with music its propitious ray.
This the blest Lover shall for Venus take,
And send up vows from Rosamonda's lake.
This Partridge soon shall view in cloudless skies,
When next he looks thro' Galileo's eyes;
And hence th' egregious wizard shall foredoom
The fate of Louis, and the fall of Rome.

Then cease, bright Nymph! to mourn thy ravish'd hair,
Which adds new glory to the shining sphere!
Not all the tresses that fair head can boast,
Shall draw such envy as the Lock you lost.
For, after all the murders of your eye,
When, after millions slain, yourself shall die:
When those fair suns shall set, as set they must,
And all those tresses shall be laid in dust,
This Lock, the Muse shall consecrate to fame,
And 'midst the stars inscribe Belinda's name.

**
The Odyssey
***

The man for wisdom's various arts renown'd,
Long exercised in woes, O Muse! resound;
Who, when his arms had wrought the destined fall
Of sacred Troy, and razed her heaven-built wall,
Wandering from clime to clime, observant stray'd,
Their manners noted, and their states survey'd,
On stormy seas unnumber'd toils he bore,
Safe with his friends to gain his natal shore:
Vain toils! their impious folly dared to prey
On herds devoted to the god of day;
The god vindictive doom'd them never more
(Ah, men unbless'd!) to touch that natal shore.
Oh, snatch some portion of these acts from fate,
Celestial Muse! and to our world relate.

Now at their native realms the Greeks arrived;
All who the wars of ten long years survived;
And 'scaped the perils of the gulfy main.
Ulysses, sole of all the victor train,
An exile from his dear paternal coast,
Deplored his absent queen and empire lost.
Calypso in her caves constrain'd his stay,
With sweet, reluctant, amorous delay;
In vain-for now the circling years disclose
The day predestined to reward his woes.
At length his Ithaca is given by fate,
Where yet new labours his arrival wait;
At length their rage the hostile powers restrain,
All but the ruthless monarch of the main.
But now the god, remote, a heavenly guest,
In AEthiopia graced the genial feast
(A race divided, whom with sloping rays
The rising and descending sun surveys);
There on the world's extremest verge revered
With hecatombs and prayer in pomp preferr'd,
Distant he lay: while in the bright abodes
Of high Olympus, Jove convened the gods:
The assembly thus the sire supreme address'd,
AEgysthus' fate revolving in his breast,
Whom young Orestes to the dreary coast
Of Pluto sent, a blood-polluted ghost.

"Perverse mankind! whose wills, created free,
Charge all their woes on absolute degree;
All to the dooming gods their guilt translate,
And follies are miscall'd the crimes of fate.
When to his lust AEgysthus gave the rein,
Did fate, or we, the adulterous act constrain?
Did fate, or we, when great Atrides died,
Urge the bold traitor to the regicide?
Hermes I sent, while yet his soul remain'd
Sincere from royal blood, and faith profaned;
To warn the wretch, that young Orestes, grown
To manly years, should re-assert the throne.
Yet, impotent of mind, and uncontroll'd,
He plunged into the gulf which Heaven foretold."

Here paused the god; and pensive thus replies
Minerva, graceful with her azure eyes:

"O thou! from whom the whole creation springs,
The source of power on earth derived to kings!
His death was equal to the direful deed;
So may the man of blood be doomed to bleed!
But grief and rage alternate wound my breast
For brave Ulysses, still by fate oppress'd.
Amidst an isle, around whose rocky shore
The forests murmur, and the surges roar,
The blameless hero from his wish'd-for home
A goddess guards in her enchanted dome;
(Atlas her sire, to whose far-piercing eye
The wonders of the deep expanded lie;
The eternal columns which on earth he rears
End in the starry vault, and prop the spheres).
By his fair daughter is the chief confined,
Who soothes to dear delight his anxious mind;
Successless all her soft caresses prove,
To banish from his breast his country's love;
To see the smoke from his loved palace rise,
While the dear isle in distant prospect lies,
With what contentment could he close his eyes!
And will Omnipotence neglect to save
The suffering virtue of the wise and brave?
Must he, whose altars on the Phrygian shore
With frequent rites, and pure, avow'd thy power,
Be doom'd the worst of human ills to prove,
Unbless'd, abandon'd to the wrath of Jove?"

"Daughter! what words have pass'd thy lips unweigh'd!
(Replied the Thunderer to the martial maid;)
Deem not unjustly by my doom oppress'd,
Of human race the wisest and the best.
Neptune, by prayer repentant rarely won,
Afflicts the chief, to avenge his giant son,
Whose visual orb Ulysses robb'd of light;
Great Polypheme, of more than mortal might?
Him young Thousa bore (the bright increase
Of Phorcys, dreaded in the sounds and seas);
Whom Neptune eyed with bloom of beauty bless'd,
And in his cave the yielding nymph compress'd
For this the god constrains the Greek to roam,
A hopeless exile from his native home,
From death alone exempt--but cease to mourn;
Let all combine to achieve his wish'd return;
Neptune atoned, his wrath shall now refrain,
Or thwart the synod of the gods in vain."

"Father and king adored!" Minerva cried,
"Since all who in the Olympian bower reside
Now make the wandering Greek their public care,
Let Hermes to the Atlantic isle repair;
Bid him, arrived in bright Calypso's court,
The sanction of the assembled powers report:
That wise Ulysses to his native land
Must speed, obedient to their high command.
Meantime Telemachus, the blooming heir
Of sea-girt Ithaca, demands my care;
'Tis mine to form his green, unpractised years
In sage debates; surrounded with his peers,
To save the state, and timely to restrain
The bold intrusion of the suitor-train;
Who crowd his palace, and with lawless power
His herds and flocks in feastful rites devour.
To distant Sparta, and the spacious waste
Of Sandy Pyle, the royal youth shall haste.
There, warm with filial love, the cause inquire
That from his realm retards his god-like sire;
Delivering early to the voice of fame
The promise of a green immortal name."

She said: the sandals of celestial mould,
Fledged with ambrosial plumes, and rich with gold,
Surround her feet: with these sublime she sails
The aerial space, and mounts the winged gales;
O'er earth and ocean wide prepared to soar,
Her dreaded arm a beamy javelin bore,
Ponderous and vast: which, when her fury burns,
Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts o'erturns.
From high Olympus prone her flight she bends,
And in the realms of Ithaca descends,
Her lineaments divine, the grave disguise
Of Mentes' form conceal'd from human eyes
(Mentes, the monarch of the Taphian land);
A glittering spear waved awful in her hand.
There in the portal placed, the heaven-born maid
Enormous riot and misrule survey'd.
On hides of beeves, before the palace gate
(Sad spoils of luxury), the suitors sate.
With rival art, and ardour in their mien,
At chess they vie, to captivate the queen;
Divining of their loves.  Attending nigh,
A menial train the flowing bowl supply.
Others, apart, the spacious hall prepare,
And form the costly feast with busy care.
There young Telemachus, his bloomy face
Glowing celestial sweet, with godlike grace
Amid the circle shines: but hope and fear
(Painful vicissitude!) his bosom tear.
Now, imaged in his mind, he sees restored
In peace and joy the people's rightful lord;
The proud oppressors fly the vengeful sword.
While his fond soul these fancied triumphs swell'd,
The stranger guest the royal youth beheld;
Grieved that a visitant so long should wait
Unmark'd, unhonour'd, at a monarch's gate;
Instant he flew with hospitable haste,
And the new friend with courteous air embraced.
"Stranger, whoe'er thou art, securely rest,
Affianced in my faith, a ready guest;
Approach the dome, the social banquet share,
And then the purpose of thy soul declare."

Thus affable and mild, the prince precedes,
And to the dome the unknown celestial leads.
The spear receiving from the hand, he placed
Against a column, fair with sculpture graced;
Where seemly ranged in peaceful order stood
Ulysses' arms now long disused to blood.
He led the goddess to the sovereign seat,
Her feet supported with a stool of state
(A purple carpet spread the pavement wide);
Then drew his seat, familiar, to her side;
Far from the suitor-train, a brutal crowd,
With insolence, and wine, elate and loud:
Where the free guest, unnoted, might relate,
If haply conscious, of his father's fate.
The golden ewer a maid obsequious brings,
Replenish'd from the cool, translucent springs;
With copious water the bright vase supplies
A silver laver of capacious size;
They wash. The tables in fair order spread,
They heap the glittering canisters with bread:
Viands of various kinds allure the taste,
Of choicest sort and savour, rich repast!
Delicious wines the attending herald brought;
The gold gave lustre to the purple draught.
Lured with the vapour of the fragrant feast,
In rush'd the suitors with voracious haste;
Marshall'd in order due, to each a sewer
Presents, to bathe his hands, a radiant ewer.
Luxurious then they feast. Observant round
Gay stripling youths the brimming goblets crown'd.
The rage of hunger quell'd, they all advance
And form to measured airs the mazy dance;
To Phemius was consign'd the chorded lyre,
Whose hand reluctant touch'd the warbling wire;
Phemius, whose voice divine could sweetest sing
High strains responsive to the vocal string.

Meanwhile, in whispers to his heavenly guest
His indignation thus the prince express'd:

"Indulge my rising grief, whilst these (my friend)
With song and dance the pompous revel end.
Light is the dance, and doubly sweet the lays,
When for the dear delight another pays.
His treasured stores those cormarants consume,
Whose bones, defrauded of a regal tomb
And common turf, lie naked on the plain,
Or doom'd to welter in the whelming main.
Should he return, that troop so blithe and bold,
With purple robes inwrought, and stiff with gold,
Precipitant in fear would wing their flight,
And curse their cumbrous pride's unwieldy weight.
But ah, I dream!-the appointed hour is fled.
And hope, too long with vain delusion fed,
Deaf to the rumour of fallacious fame,
Gives to the roll of death his glorious name!
With venial freedom let me now demand
Thy name, thy lineage, and paternal land;
Sincere from whence began thy course, recite,
And to what ship I owe the friendly freight?
Now first to me this visit dost thou deign,
Or number'd in my father's social train?
All who deserved his choice he made his own,
And, curious much to know, he far was known."

"My birth I boast (the blue-eyed virgin cries)
From great Anchialus, renown'd and wise;
Mentes my name; I rule the Taphian race,
Whose bounds the deep circumfluent waves embrace;
A duteous people, and industrious isle,
To naval arts inured, and stormy toil.
Freighted with iron from my native land,
I steer my voyage to the Brutian strand
To gain by commerce, for the labour'd mass,
A just proportion of refulgent brass.
Far from your capital my ship resides
At Reitorus, and secure at anchor rides;
Where waving groves on airy Neign grow,
Supremely tall and shade the deeps below.
Thence to revisit your imperial dome,
An old hereditary guest I come;
Your father's friend.  Laertes can relate
Our faith unspotted, and its early date;
Who, press'd with heart-corroding grief and years,
To the gay court a rural shed pretors,
Where, sole of all his train, a matron sage
Supports with homely fond his drooping age,
With feeble steps from marshalling his vines
Returning sad, when toilsome day declines.

"With friendly speed, induced by erring fame,
To hail Ulysses' safe return I came;
But still the frown of some celestial power
With envious joy retards the blissful hour.
Let not your soul be sunk in sad despair;
He lives, he breathes this heavenly vital air,
Among a savage race, whose shelfy bounds
With ceaseless roar the foaming deep surrounds.
The thoughts which roll within my ravish'd breast,
To me, no seer, the inspiring gods suggest;
Nor skill'd nor studious, with prophetic eye
To judge the winged omens of the sky.
Yet hear this certain speech, nor deem it vain;
Though adamantine bonds the chief restrain,
The dire restraint his wisdom will defeat,
And soon restore him to his regal seat.
But generous youth! sincere and free declare,
Are you, of manly growth, his royal heir?
For sure Ulysses in your look appears,
The same his features, if the same his years.
Such was that face, on which I dwelt with joy
Ere Greece assembled stemm'd the tides to Troy;
But, parting then for that detested shore,
Our eyes, unhappy? never greeted more."

"To prove a genuine birth (the prince replies)
On female truth assenting faith relies.
Thus manifest of right, I build my claim
Sure-founded on a fair maternal fame,
Ulysses' son: but happier he, whom fate
Hath placed beneath the storms which toss the great!
Happier the son, whose hoary sire is bless'd
With humble affluence, and domestic rest!
Happier than I, to future empire born,
But doom'd a father's wretch'd fate to mourn!"

To whom, with aspect mild, the guest divine:
"Oh true descendant of a sceptred line!
The gods a glorious fate from anguish free
To chaste Penelope's increase decree.
But say, yon jovial troops so gaily dress'd,
Is this a bridal or a friendly feast?
Or from their deed I rightlier may divine,
Unseemly flown with insolence and wine?
Unwelcome revellers, whose lawless joy
Pains the sage ear, and hurts the sober eye."

"Magnificence of old (the prince replied)
Beneath our roof with virtue could reside;
Unblamed abundance crowned the royal board,
What time this dome revered her prudent lord;
Who now (so Heaven decrees) is doom'd to mourn,
Bitter constraint, erroneous and forlorn.
Better the chief, on Ilion's hostile plain,
Had fall'n surrounded with his warlike train;
Or safe return'd, the race of glory pass'd,
New to his friends' embrace, and breathed his last!
Then grateful Greece with streaming eyes would raise,
Historic marbles to record his praise;
His praise, eternal on the faithful stone,
Had with transmissive honour graced his son.
Now snatch'd by harpies to the dreary coast.
Sunk is the hero, and his glory lost;
Vanish'd at once! unheard of, and unknown!
And I his heir in misery alone.
Nor for a dear lost father only flow
The filial tears, but woe succeeds to woe
To tempt the spouseless queen with amorous wiles
Resort the nobles from the neighbouring isles;
From Samos, circled with the Ionian main,
Dulichium, and Zacynthas' sylvan reign;
Ev'n with presumptuous hope her bed to ascend,
The lords of Ithaca their right pretend.
She seems attentive to their pleaded vows,
Her heart detesting what her ear allows.
They, vain expectants of the bridal hour,
My stores in riotous expense devour.
In feast and dance the mirthful months employ,
And meditate my doom to crown their joy."

With tender pity touch'd, the goddess cried:
"Soon may kind Heaven a sure relief provide,
Soon may your sire discharge the vengeance due,
And all your wrongs the proud oppressors rue!
Oh! in that portal should the chief appear,
Each hand tremendous with a brazen spear,
In radiant panoply his limbs incased
(For so of old my fathers court he graced,
When social mirth unbent his serious soul,
O'er the full banquet, and the sprightly bowl);
He then from Ephyre, the fair domain
Of Ilus, sprung from Jason's royal strain,
Measured a length of seas, a toilsome length, in vain.
For, voyaging to learn the direful art
To taint with deadly drugs the barbed dart;
Observant of the gods, and sternly just,
Ilus refused to impart the baneful trust;
With friendlier zeal my father's soul was fired,
The drugs he knew, and gave the boon desired.
Appear'd he now with such heroic port,
As then conspicuous at the Taphian court;
Soon should you boasters cease their haughty strife,
Or each atone his guilty love with life.
But of his wish'd return the care resign,
Be future vengeance to the powers divine.
My sentence hear: with stern distaste avow'd,
To their own districts drive the suitor-crowd;
When next the morning warms the purple east,
Convoke the peerage, and the gods attest;
The sorrows of your inmost soul relate;
And form sure plans to save the sinking state.
Should second love a pleasing flame inspire,
And the chaste queen connubial rights require;
Dismiss'd with honour, let her hence repair
To great Icarius, whose paternal care
Will guide her passion, and reward her choice
With wealthy dower, and bridal gifts of price.
Then let this dictate of my love prevail:
Instant, to foreign realms prepare to sail,
To learn your father's fortunes; Fame may prove,
Or omen'd voice (the messenger of Jove),
Propitious to the search. Direct your toil
Through the wide ocean first to sandy Pyle;
Of Nestor, hoary sage, his doom demand:
Thence speed your voyage to the Spartan strand;
For young Atrides to the Achaian coast
Arrived the last of all the victor host.
If yet Ulysses views the light, forbear,
Till the fleet hours restore the circling year.
But if his soul hath wing'd the destined flight,
Inhabitant of deep disastrous night;
Homeward with pious speed repass the main,
To the pale shade funereal rites ordain,
Plant the fair column o'er the vacant grave,
A hero's honours let the hero have.
With decent grief the royal dead deplored,
For the chaste queen select an equal lord.
Then let revenge your daring mind employ,
By fraud or force the suitor train destroy,
And starting into manhood, scorn the boy.
Hast thou not heard how young Orestes, fired
With great revenge, immortal praise acquired?
His virgin-sword AEgysthus' veins imbrued;
The murderer fell, and blood atoned for blood.
O greatly bless'd with every blooming grace!
With equal steps the paths of glory trace;
Join to that royal youth's your rival name,
And shine eternal in the sphere of fame.
But my associates now my stay deplore,
Impatient on the hoarse-resounding shore.
Thou, heedful of advice, secure proceed;
My praise the precept is, be thine the deed.

"The counsel of my friend (the youth rejoin'd)
Imprints conviction on my grateful mind.
So fathers speak (persuasive speech and mild)
Their sage experience to the favourite child.
But, since to part, for sweet refection due,
The genial viands let my train renew;
And the rich pledge of plighted faith receive,
Worthy the air of Ithaca to give."

"Defer the promised boon (the goddess cries,
Celestial azure brightening in her eyes),
And let me now regain the Reithrian port;
From Temese return'd, your royal court
I shall revisit, and that pledge receive;
And gifts, memorial of our friendship, leave."

Abrupt, with eagle-speed she cut the sky;
Instant invisible to mortal eye.
Then first he recognized the ethereal guest;
Wonder and joy alternate fire his breast;
Heroic thoughts, infused, his heart dilate;
Revolving much his father's doubtful fate.
At length, composed, he join'd the suitor-throng;
Hush'd in attention to the warbled song.
His tender theme the charming lyrist chose.
Minerva's anger, and the dreadful woes
Which voyaging from Troy the victors bore,
While storms vindictive intercept the store.
The shrilling airs the vaulted roof rebounds,
Reflecting to the queen the silver sounds.
With grief renew'd the weeping fair descends;
Their sovereign's step a virgin train attends:
A veil, of richest texture wrought, she wears,
And silent to the joyous hall repairs.
There from the portal, with her mild command,
Thus gently checks the minstrel's tuneful hand:

"Phemius! let acts of gods, and heroes old,
What ancient bards in hall and bower have told,
Attemper'd to the lyre, your voice employ;
Such the pleased ear will drink with silent joy.
But, oh! forbear that dear disastrous name,
To sorrow sacred, and secure of fame;
My bleeding bosom sickens at the sound,
And every piercing note inflicts a wound."

"Why, dearest object of my duteous love,
(Replied the prince,) will you the bard reprove?
Oft, Jove's ethereal rays (resistless fire)
The chanters soul and raptured song inspire
Instinct divine? nor blame severe his choice,
Warbling the Grecian woes with heart and voice;
For novel lays attract our ravish'd ears;
But old, the mind with inattention hears:
Patient permit the sadly pleasing strain;
Familiar now with grief, your tears refrain,
And in the public woe forget your own;
You weep not for a perish'd lord alone.
What Greeks new wandering in the Stygian gloom,
Wish your Ulysses shared an equal doom!
Your widow'd hours, apart, with female toil
And various labours of the loom beguile;
There rule, from palace-cares remote and free;
That care to man belongs, and most to me."

Mature beyond his years, the queen admires
His sage reply, and with her train retires.
Then swelling sorrows burst their former bounds,
With echoing grief afresh the dome resounds;
Till Pallas, piteous of her plaintive cries,
In slumber closed her silver-streaming eyes.

Meantime, rekindled at the royal charms,
Tumultuous love each beating bosom warms;
Intemperate rage a wordy war began;
But bold Telemachus assumed the man.
"Instant (he cried) your female discord end,
Ye deedless boasters! and the song attend;
Obey that sweet compulsion, nor profane
With dissonance the smooth melodious strain.
Pacific now prolong the jovial feast;
But when the dawn reveals the rosy east,
I, to the peers assembled, shall propose
The firm resolve, I here in few disclose;
No longer live the cankers of my court;
All to your several states with speed resort;
Waste in wild riot what your land allows,
There ply the early feast, and late carouse.
But if, to honour lost, 'tis still decreed
For you my bowl shall flow, my flock shall bleed;
Judge and revenge my right, impartial Jove!
By him and all the immortal thrones above
(A sacred oath), each proud oppressor slain,
Shall with inglorious gore this marble stain."

Awed by the prince, thus haughty, bold, and young,
Rage gnaw'd the lip, and wonder chain'd the tongue.
Silence at length the gay Antinous broke,
Constrain'd a smile, and thus ambiguous spoke:
"What god to your untutor'd youth affords
This headlong torrent of amazing words?
May Jove delay thy reign, and cumber late
So bright a genius with the toils of state!"

"Those toils (Telemachus serene replies)
Have charms, with all their weight, t'allure the wise.
Fast by the throne obsequious fame resides,
And wealth incessant rolls her golden tides.
Nor let Antinous rage, if strong desire
Of wealth and fame a youthful bosom fire:
Elect by Jove, his delegate of sway,
With joyous pride the summons I'd obey.
Whene'er Ulysses roams the realm of night,
Should factious power dispute my lineal right,
Some other Greeks a fairer claim may plead;
To your pretence their title would precede.
At least, the sceptre lost, I still should reign
Sole o'er my vassals, and domestic train."

To this Eurymachus: "To Heaven alone
Refer the choice to fill the vacant throne.
Your patrimonial stores in peace possess;
Undoubted, all your filial claim confess:
Your private right should impious power invade,
The peers of Ithaca would arm in aid.
But say, that stranger guest who late withdrew,
What and from whence? his name and lineage shew.
His grave demeanour and majestic grace
Speak him descended of non vulgar race:
Did he some loan of ancient right require,
Or came forerunner of your sceptr'd sire?"

"Oh son of Polybus!" the prince replies,
"No more my sire will glad these longing eyes;
The queen's fond hope inventive rumour cheers,
Or vain diviners' dreams divert her fears.
That stranger-guest the Taphian realm obeys,
A realm defended with encircling seas.
Mentes, an ever-honour'd name, of old
High in Ulysses' social list enroll'd."

Thus he, though conscious of the ethereal guest,
Answer'd evasive of the sly request.
Meantime the lyre rejoins the sprightly lay;
Love-dittied airs, and dance, conclude the day
But when the star of eve with golden light
Adorn'd the matron brow of sable night,
The mirthful train dispersing quit the court,
And to their several domes to rest resort.
A towering structure to the palace join'd;
To this his steps the thoughtful prince inclined:
In his pavilion there, to sleep repairs;
The lighted torch, the sage Euryclea bears
(Daughter of Ops, the just Pisenor's son,
For twenty beeves by great Laertes won;
In rosy prime with charms attractive graced,
Honour'd by him, a gentle lord and chaste,
With dear esteem: too wise, with jealous strife
To taint the joys of sweet connubial life.
Sole with Telemachus her service ends,
A child she nursed him, and a man attends).
Whilst to his couch himself the prince address'd,
The duteous dame received the purple vest;
The purple vest with decent care disposed,
The silver ring she pull'd, the door reclosed,
The bolt, obedient to the silken cord,
To the strong staple's inmost depth restored,
Secured the valves. There, wrapped in silent shade,
Pensive, the rules the goddess gave he weigh'd;
Stretch'd on the downy fleece, no rest he knows,
And in his raptured soul the vision glows.

Now reddening from the dawn, the morning ray
Glow'd in the front of heaven, and gave the day
The youthful hero, with returning light,
Rose anxious from the inquietudes of night.
A royal robe he wore with graceful pride,
A two-edged falchion threaten'd by his side,
Embroider'd sandals glitter'd as he trod,
And forth he moved, majestic as a god.
Then by his heralds, restless of delay,
To council calls the peers: the peers obey.
Soon as in solemn form the assembly sate,
From his high dome himself descends in state.
Bright in his hand a ponderous javelin shined;
Two dogs, a faithful guard, attend behind;
Pallas with grace divine his form improves,
And gazing crowds admire him as he moves,

His father's throne he fill'd; while distant stood
The hoary peers, and aged wisdom bow'd.

'Twas silence all.  At last AEgyptius spoke;
AEgyptius, by his age and sorrow broke;
A length of days his soul with prudence crown'd,
A length of days had bent him to the ground.
His eldest hope in arms to Ilion came,
By great Ulysses taught the path to fame;
But (hapless youth) the hideous Cyclops tore
His quivering limbs, and quaff'd his spouting gore.
Three sons remain'd; to climb with haughty fires
The royal bed, Eurynomus aspires;
The rest with duteous love his griefs assuage,
And ease the sire of half the cares of age.
Yet still his Antiphus he loves, he mourns,
And, as he stood, he spoke and wept by turns,

"Since great Ulysses sought the Phrygian plains,
Within these walls inglorious silence reigns.
Say then, ye peers! by whose commands we meet?
Why here once more in solemn council sit?
Ye young, ye old, the weighty cause disclose:
Arrives some message of invading foes?
Or say, does high necessity of state
Inspire some patriot, and demand debate?
The present synod speaks its author wise;
Assist him, Jove, thou regent of the skies!"

He spoke. Telemachus with transport glows,
Embraced the omen, and majestic rose
(His royal hand the imperial sceptre sway'd);
Then thus, addressing to AEgyptius, said:

"Reverend old man! lo here confess'd he stands
By whom ye meet; my grief your care demands.
No story I unfold of public woes,
Nor bear advices of impending foes:
Peace the blest land, and joys incessant crown:
Of all this happy realm, I grieve alone.
For my lost sire continual sorrows spring,
The great, the good; your father and your king.
Yet more; our house from its foundation bows,
Our foes are powerful, and your sons the foes;
Hither, unwelcome to the queen, they come;
Why seek they not the rich Icarian dome?
If she must wed, from other hands require
The dowry: is Telemachus her sire?
Yet through my court the noise of revel rings,
And waste the wise frugality of kings.
Scarce all my herds their luxury suffice;
Scarce all my wine their midnight hours supplies.
Safe in my youth, in riot still they grow,
Nor in the helpless orphan dread a foe.
But come it will, the time when manhood grants
More powerful advocates than vain complaints.
Approach that hour! insufferable wrong
Cries to the gods, and vengeance sleeps too long.
Rise then, ye peers! with virtuous anger rise;
Your fame revere, but most the avenging skies.
By all the deathless powers that reign above,
By righteous Themis and by thundering Jove
(Themis, who gives to councils, or denies
Success; and humbles, or confirms the wise),
Rise in my aid! suffice the tears that flow
For my lost sire, nor add new woe to woe.
If e'er he bore the sword to strengthen ill,
Or, having power to wrong, betray'd the will,
On me, on me your kindled wrath assuage,
And bid the voice of lawless riot rage.
If ruin to your royal race ye doom,
Be you the spoilers, and our wealth consume.
Then might we hope redress from juster laws,
And raise all Ithaca to aid our cause:
But while your sons commit the unpunish'd wrong,
You make the arm of violence too strong."

While thus he spoke, with rage and grief he frown'd,
And dash'd the imperial sceptre to the ground.
The big round tear hung trembling in his eye:
The synod grieved, and gave a pitying sigh,
Then silent sate--at length Antinous burns
With haughty rage, and sternly thus returns:

"O insolence of youth! whose tongue affords
Such railing eloquence, and war of words.
Studious thy country's worthies to defame,
Thy erring voice displays thy mother's shame.
Elusive of the bridal day, she gives
Fond hopes to all, and all with hopes deceives.
Did not the sun, through heaven's wide azure roll'd,
For three long years the royal fraud behold?
While she, laborious in delusion, spread
The spacious loom, and mix'd the various thread:
Where as to life the wondrous figures rise,
Thus spoke the inventive queen, with artful sighs:

"Though cold in death Ulysses breathes no more,
Cease yet awhile to urge the bridal hour:
Cease, till to great Laertes I bequeath
A task of grief, his ornaments of death.
Lest when the Fates his royal ashes claim,
The Grecian matrons taint my spotless fame;
When he, whom living mighty realms obey'd,
Shall want in death a shroud to grace his shade.'

"Thus she: at once the generous train complies,
Nor fraud mistrusts in virtue's fair disguise.
The work she plied; but, studious of delay,
By night reversed the labours of the day.
While thrice the sun his annual journey made,
The conscious lamp the midnight fraud survey'd;
Unheard, unseen, three years her arts prevail;
The fourth her maid unfolds the amazing tale.
We saw, as unperceived we took our stand,
The backward labours of her faithless hand.
Then urged, she perfects her illustrious toils;
A wondrous monument of female wiles!

"But you, O peers! and thou, O prince! give ear
(I speak aloud, that every Greek may hear):
Dismiss the queen; and if her sire approves
Let him espouse her to the peer she loves:
Bid instant to prepare the bridal train,
Nor let a race of princes wait in vain.
Though with a grace divine her soul is blest,
And all Minerva breathes within her breast,
In wondrous arts than woman more renown'd,
And more than woman with deep wisdom crown'd;
Though Tyro nor Mycene match her name,
Not great Alemena (the proud boasts of fame);
Yet thus by heaven adorn'd, by heaven's decree
She shines with fatal excellence, to thee:
With thee, the bowl we drain, indulge the feast,
Till righteous heaven reclaim her stubborn breast.
What though from pole to pole resounds her name!
The son's destruction waits the mother's fame:
For, till she leaves thy court, it is decreed,
Thy bowl to empty and thy flock to bleed."

While yet he speaks, Telemachus replies:
"Ev'n nature starts, and what ye ask denies.
Thus, shall I thus repay a mother's cares,
Who gave me life, and nursed my infant years!
While sad on foreign shores Ulysses treads.
Or glides a ghost with unapparent shades;
How to Icarius in the bridal hour
Shall I, by waste undone, refund the dower?
How from my father should I vengeance dread!
How would my mother curse my hated head!
And while In wrath to vengeful fiends she cries,
How from their hell would vengeful fiends arise!
Abhorr'd by all, accursed my name would grow,
The earth's disgrace, and human-kind my foe.
If this displease, why urge ye here your stay?
Haste from the court, ye spoilers, haste away:
Waste in wild riot what your land allows,
There ply the early feast, and late carouse.
But if to honour lost, 'tis still decreed
For you my howl shall flow, my flocks shall bleed;
Judge, and assert my right, impartial Jove!
By him, and all the immortal host above
(A sacred oath), if heaven the power supply,
Vengeance I vow, and for your wrongs ye die."

With that, two eagles from a mountain's height
By Jove's command direct their rapid flight;
Swift they descend, with wing to wing conjoin'd,
Stretch their broad plumes, and float upon the wind.
Above the assembled peers they wheel on high,
And clang their wings, and hovering beat the sky;
With ardent eyes the rival train they threat,
And shrieking loud denounce approaching fate.
They cuff, they tear; their cheeks and neck they rend,
And from their plumes huge drops of blood descend;
Then sailing o'er the domes and towers, they fly,
Full toward the east, and mount into the sky.

The wondering rivals gaze, with cares oppress'd,
And chilling horrors freeze in every breast,
Till big with knowledge of approaching woes,
The prince of augurs, Halitherses, rose:
Prescient he view'd the aerial tracks, and drew
A sure presage from every wing that flew.

"Ye sons (he cried) of Ithaca, give ear;
Hear all! but chiefly you, O rivals! hear.
Destruction sure o'er all your heads impends
Ulysses comes, and death his steps attends.
Nor to the great alone is death decreed;
We and our guilty Ithaca must bleed.
Why cease we then the wrath of heaven to stay?
Be humbled all, and lead, ye great! the way.
For lo? my words no fancied woes relate;
I speak from science and the voice of fate.

"When great Ulysses sought the Phrygian shores
To shake with war proud Ilion's lofty towers,
Deeds then undone me faithful tongue foretold:
Heaven seal'd my words, and you those deeds behold.
I see (I cried) his woes, a countless train;
I see his friends o'erwhelm'd beneath the main;
How twice ten years from shore to shore he roams:
Now twice ten years are past, and now he comes!"

To whom Eurymachus--"Fly, dotard fly,
With thy wise dreams, and fables of the sky.
Go prophesy at home, thy sons advise:
Here thou art sage in vain--I better read the skies
Unnumber'd birds glide through the aerial way;
Vagrants of air, and unforeboding stray.
Cold in the tomb, or in the deeps below,
Ulysses lies; oh wert thou laid as low!
Then would that busy head no broils suggest,
For fire to rage Telemachus' breast,
From him some bribe thy venal tongue requires,
And interest, not the god, thy voice inspires.
His guideless youth, if thy experienced age
Mislead fallacious into idle rage,
Vengeance deserved thy malice shall repress.
And but augment the wrongs thou would'st redress,
Telemachus may bid the queen repair
To great Icarius, whose paternal care
Will guide her passion, and reward her choice
With wealthy dower, and bridal gifts of price.
Till she retires, determined we remain,
And both the prince and augur threat in vain:
His pride of words, and thy wild dream of fate,
Move not the brave, or only move their hate,
Threat on, O prince! elude the bridal day.
Threat on, till all thy stores in waste decay.
True, Greece affords a train of lovely dames,
In wealth and beauty worthy of our flames:
But never from this nobler suit we cease;
For wealth and beauty less than virtue please."

To whom the youth: "Since then in vain I tell
My numerous woes, in silence let them dwell.
But Heaven, and all the Greeks, have heard my wrongs;
To Heaven, and all the Greeks, redress belongs;
Yet this I ask (nor be it ask'd in vain),
A bark to waft me o'er the rolling main,
The realms of Pyle and Sparta to explore,
And seek my royal sire from shore to shore;
If, or to fame his doubtful fate be known,
Or to be learn'd from oracles alone,
If yet he lives, with patience I forbear,
Till the fleet hours restore the circling year;
But if already wandering in the train
Of empty shades, I measure back the main,
Plant the fair column o'er the mighty dead,
And yield his consort to the nuptial bed."

He ceased; and while abash'd the peers attend,
Mentor arose, Ulysses' faithful friend:
(When fierce in arms he sought the scenes of war,
"My friend (he cried), my palace be thy care;
Years roll'd on years my godlike sire decay,
Guard thou his age, and his behests obey.")
Stern as he rose, he cast his eyes around,
That flash'd with rage; and as spoke, he frown'd,

"O never, never more let king be just,
Be mild in power, or faithful to his trust!
Let tyrants govern with an iron rod,
Oppress, destroy, and be the scourge of God;
Since he who like a father held his reign,
So soon forgot, was just and mild in vain!
True, while my friend is grieved, his griefs I share;
Yet now the rivals are my smallest care:
They for the mighty mischiefs they devise,
Ere long shall pay--their forfeit lives the price.
But against you, ye Greeks! ye coward train!
Gods! how my soul is moved with just disdain!
Dumb ye all stand, and not one tongue affords
His injured prince the little aid of words."

While yet he spoke, Leocritus rejoined:
"O pride of words, and arrogance of mind!
Would'st thou to rise in arms the Greeks advise?
Join all your powers? in arms, ye Greeks, arise!
Yet would your powers in vain our strength oppose.
The valiant few o'ermatch a host of foes.
Should great Ulysses stern appear in arms,
While the bowl circles and the banquet warms;
Though to his breast his spouse with transport flies,
Torn from her breast, that hour, Ulysses dies.
But hence retreating to your domes repair.
To arm the vessel, Mentor! be thy care,
And Halitherses! thine: be each his friend;
Ye loved the father: go, the son attend.
But yet, I trust, the boaster means to stay
Safe in the court, nor tempt the watery way."

Then, with a rushing sound the assembly bend
Diverse their steps: the rival rout ascend
The royal dome; while sad the prince explores
The neighbouring main, and sorrowing treads the shores.
There, as the waters o'er his hands he shed,
The royal suppliant to Minerva pray'd:

"O goddess! who descending from the skies
Vouchsafed thy presence to my wondering eyes,
By whose commands the raging deeps I trace,
And seek my sire through storms and rolling seas!
Hear from thy heavens above, O warrior maid!
Descend once more, propitious to my aid.
Without thy presence, vain is thy command:
Greece, and the rival train, thy voice withstand."

Indulgent to his prayer, the goddess took
Sage Mentor's form, and thus like Mentor spoke:

"O prince, in early youth divinely wise,
Born, the Ulysses of thy age to rise
If to the son the father's worth descends,
O'er the wide wave success thy ways attends
To tread the walks of death he stood prepared;
And what he greatly thought, he nobly dared.
Were not wise sons descendant of the wise,
And did not heroes from brave heroes rise,
Vain were my hopes: few sons attain the praise
Of their great sires, and most their sires disgrace.
But since thy veins paternal virtue fires,
And all Penelope thy soul inspires,
Go, and succeed: the rivals' aims despise;
For never, never wicked man was wise.
Blind they rejoice, though now, ev'n now they fall;
Death hastes amain: one hour o'erwhelms them all!
And lo, with speed we plough the watery way;
My power shall guard thee, and my hand convey:
The winged vessel studious I prepare,
Through seas and realms companion of thy care.
Thou to the court ascend: and to the shores
(When night advances) bear the naval stores;
Bread, that decaying man with strength supplies,
And generous wine, which thoughtful sorrow flies.
Meanwhile the mariners, by my command,
Shall speed aboard, a valiant chosen band.
Wide o'er the bay, by vessel vessel rides;
The best I choose to waft then o'er the tides."

She spoke: to his high dome the prince returns,
And, as he moves, with royal anguish mourns.
'Twas riot all, among the lawless train;
Boar bled by boar, and goat by goat lay slain.
Arrived, his hand the gay Antinous press'd,
And thus deriding, with a smile address'd:

"Grieve not, O daring prince! that noble heart;
Ill suits gay youth the stern heroic part.
Indulge the genial hour, unbend thy soul,
Leave thought to age, and drain the flowing bowl.
Studious to ease thy grief, our care provides
The bark, to waft thee o'er the swelling tides."

"Is this (returns the prince) for mirth a time?
When lawless gluttons riot, mirth's a crime;
The luscious wines, dishonour'd, lose their taste;
The song is noise, and impious is the feast.
Suffice it to have spent with swift decay
The wealth of kings, and made my youth a prey.
But now the wise instructions of the sage,
And manly thoughts inspired by manly age,
Teach me to seek redress for all my woe,
Here, or in Pyle--in Pyle, or here, your foe.
Deny your vessels, ye deny in vain:
A private voyager I pass the main.
Free breathe the winds, and free the billows flow;
And where on earth I live, I live your foe."

He spoke and frown'd, nor longer deign'd to stay,
Sternly his hand withdrew, and strode away.

Meantime, o'er all the dome, they quaff, they feast,
Derisive taunts were spread from guest to guest,
And each in jovial mood his mate address'd:

"Tremble ye not, O friends, and coward fly,
Doom'd by the stern Telemachus to die?
To Pyle or Sparta to demand supplies,
Big with revenge, the mighty warrior flies;
Or comes from Ephyre with poisons fraught,
And kills us all in one tremendous draught!"

"Or who can say (his gamesome mate replies)
But, while the danger of the deeps he tries
He, like his sire, may sink deprived of breath,
And punish us unkindly by his death?
What mighty labours would he then create,
To seize his treasures, and divide his state,
The royal palace to the queen convey,
Or him she blesses in the bridal day!"

Meantime the lofty rooms the prince surveys,
Where lay the treasures of the Ithacian race:
Here ruddy brass and gold refulgent blazed;
There polished chests embroider'd vestures graced;
Here jars of oil breathed forth a rich perfume;
There casks of wine in rows adorn'd the dome
(Pure flavorous wine, by gods in bounty given
And worthy to exalt the feasts of heaven).
Untouch'd they stood, till, his long labours o'er,
The great Ulysses reach'd his native shore.
A double strength of bars secured the gates;
Fast by the door the wise Euryclea waits;
Euryclea, who great Ops! thy lineage shared,
And watch'd all night, all day, a faithful guard.

To whom the prince: "O thou whose guardian care
Nursed the most wretched king that breathes the air;
Untouch'd and sacred may these vessels stand,
Till great Ulysses views his native land.
But by thy care twelve urns of wine be fill'd;
Next these in worth, and firm these urns be seal'd;
And twice ten measures of the choicest flour
Prepared, are yet descends the evening hour.
For when the favouring shades of night arise,
And peaceful slumbers close my mother's eyes,
Me from our coast shall spreading sails convey,
To seek Ulysses through the watery way."

While yet he spoke, she fill'd the walls with cries,
And tears ran trickling from her aged eyes.
"O whither, whither flies my son (she cried)
To realms; that rocks and roaring seas divide?
In foreign lands thy father's days decay'd.
And foreign lands contain the mighty dead.
The watery way ill-fated if thou try,
All, all must perish, and by fraud you die!
Then stay, my, child! storms beat, and rolls the main,
Oh, beat those storms, and roll the seas in vain!"

"Far hence (replied the prince) thy fears be driven:
Heaven calls me forth; these counsels are of Heaven.
But, by the powers that hate the perjured, swear,
To keep my voyage from the royal ear,
Nor uncompell'd the dangerous truth betray,
Till twice six times descends the lamp of day,
Lest the sad tale a mother's life impair,
And grief destroy what time awhile would spare."

Thus he. The matron with uplifted eyes
Attests the all-seeing sovereign of the skies.
Then studious she prepares the choicest flour,
The strength of wheat and wines an ample store.
While to the rival train the prince returns,
The martial goddess with impatience burns;
Like thee, Telemachus, in voice and size,
With speed divine from street to street she flies,
She bids the mariners prepared to stand,
When night descends, embodied on the strand.
Then to Noemon swift she runs, she flies,
And asks a bark: the chief a bark supplies.

And now, declining with his sloping wheels,
Down sunk the sun behind the western hills
The goddess shoved the vessel from the shores,
And stow'd within its womb the naval stores,
Full in the openings of the spacious main
It rides; and now descends the sailor-train,

Next, to the court, impatient of delay.
With rapid step the goddess urged her way;
There every eye with slumberous chains she bound,
And dash'd the flowing goblet to the ground.
Drowsy they rose, with heavy fumes oppress'd,
Reel'd from the palace, and retired to rest.
Then thus, in Mentor's reverend form array'd,
Spoke to Telemachus the martial maid.
"Lo! on the seas, prepared the vessel stands,
The impatient mariner thy speed demands."
Swift as she spoke, with rapid pace she leads;
The footsteps of the deity he treads.
Swift to the shore they move along the strand;
The ready vessel rides, the sailors ready stand.

He bids them bring their stores; the attending train
Load the tall bark, and launch into the main,
The prince and goddess to the stern ascend;
To the strong stroke at once the rowers bend.
Full from the west she bids fresh breezes blow;
The sable billows foam and roar below.
The chief his orders gives; the obedient band
With due observance wait the chief's command;
With speed the mast they rear, with speed unbind
The spacious sheet, and stretch it to the wind.
High o'er the roaring waves the spreading sails
Bow the tall mast, and swell before the gales;
The crooked keel the parting surge divides,
And to the stern retreating roll the tides.
And now they ship their oars, and crown with wine
The holy goblet to the powers divine:
Imploring all the gods that reign above,
But chief the blue-eyed progeny of Jove.

Thus all the night they stem the liquid way,
And end their voyage with the morning ray.

The sacred sun, above the waters raised,
Through heaven's eternal brazen portals blazed;
And wide o'er earth diffused his cheering ray,
To gods and men to give the golden day.
Now on the coast of Pyle the vessel falls,
Before old Neleus' venerable walls.
There suppliant to the monarch of the flood,
At nine green theatres the Pylians stood,
Each held five hundred (a deputed train),
At each, nine oxen on the sand lay slain.
They taste the entrails, and the altars load
With smoking thighs, an offering to the god.
Full for the port the Ithacensians stand,
And furl their sails, and issue on the land.
Telemachus already press'd the shore;
Not first, the power of wisdom march'd before,
And ere the sacrificing throng he join'd,
Admonish'd thus his well-attending mind:

"Proceed, my son! this youthful shame expel;
An honest business never blush to tell.
To learn what fates thy wretched sire detain,
We pass'd the wide immeasurable main.
Meet then the senior far renown'd for sense
With reverend awe, but decent confidence:
Urge him with truth to frame his fair replies;
And sure he will; for wisdom never lies."

"Oh tell me, Mentor! tell me, faithful guide
(The youth with prudent modesty replied),
How shall I meet, or how accost the sage,
Unskill'd in speech, nor yet mature of age?
Awful th'approach, and hard the task appears,
To question wisely men of riper years."

To whom the martial goddess thus rejoin'd:
"Search, for some thoughts, thy own suggesting mind;
And others, dictated by heavenly power,
Shall rise spontaneous in the needful hour.
For nought unprosperous shall thy ways attend,
Born with good omens, and with heaven thy friend."

She spoke, and led the way with swiftest speed;
As swift, the youth pursued the way she led;
and join'd the band before the sacred fire,
Where sate, encompass'd with his sons, the sire.
The youth of Pylos, some on pointed wood
Transfix'd the fragments, some prepared the food:
In friendly throngs they gather to embrace
Their unknown guests, and at the banquet place,
Pisistratus was first to grasp their hands,
And spread soft hides upon the yellow sands;
Along the shore the illustrious pair he led,
Where Nestor sate with the youthful Thrasymed,
To each a portion of the feast he bore,
And held the golden goblet foaming o'er;
Then first approaching to the elder guest,
The latent goddess in these words address'd:
"Whoe'er thou art, from fortune brings to keep
These rites of Neptune, monarch of the deep,
Thee first it fits, O stranger!  to prepare
The due libation and the solemn prayer;
Then give thy friend to shed the sacred wine;
Though much thy younger, and his years like mine,
He too, I deem, implores the power divine;
For all mankind alike require their grace,
All born to want; a miserable race!"
He spake, and to her hand preferr'd the bowl;
A secret pleasure touch'd Athena's soul,
To see the preference due to sacred age
Regarded ever by the just and sage.
Of Ocean's king she then implores the grace.
"O thou! whose arms this ample globe embrace,
Fulfil our wish, and let thy glory shine
On Nestor first, and Nestor's royal line;
Next grant the Pylian states their just desires,
Pleased with their hecatomb's ascending fires;
Last, deign Telemachus and me to bless,
And crown our voyage with desired success."

Thus she: and having paid the rite divine,
Gave to Ulysses' son the rosy wine.
Suppliant he pray'd. And now the victims dress'd
They draw, divide, and celebrate the feast.
The banquet done, the narrative old man,
Thus mild, the pleasing conference began:

"Now gentle guests! the genial banquet o'er,
It fits to ask ye, what your native shore,
And whence your race? on what adventure say,
Thus far you wander through the watery way?
Relate if business, or the thirst of gain,
Engage your journey o'er the pathless main
Where savage pirates seek through seas unknown
The lives of others, venturous of their own."

Urged by the precepts by the goddess given,
And fill'd with confidence infused from Heaven,
The youth, whom Pallas destined to be wise
And famed among the sons of men, replies:
"Inquir'st thou, father! from what coast we came?
(Oh grace and glory of the Grecian name!)
From where high Ithaca o'erlooks the floods,
Brown with o'er-arching shades and pendent woods
Us to these shores our filial duty draws,
A private sorrow, not a public cause.
My sire I seek, where'er the voice of fame
Has told the glories of his noble name,
The great Ulysses; famed from shore to shore
For valour much, for hardy suffering more.
Long time with thee before proud Ilion's wall
In arms he fought; with thee beheld her fall.
Of all the chiefs, this hero's fate alone
Has Jove reserved, unheard of, and unknown;
Whether in fields by hostile fury slain,
Or sunk by tempests in the gulfy main?
Of this to learn, oppress'd with tender fears,
Lo, at thy knee his suppliant son appears.
If or thy certain eye, or curious ear,
Have learnt his fate, the whole dark story clear
And, oh! whate'er Heaven destined to betide,
Let neither flattery soothe, nor pity hide.
Prepared I stand: he was but born to try
The lot of man; to suffer, and to die.
Oh then, if ever through the ten years' war
The wise, the good Ulysses claim'd thy care;
If e'er he join'd thy council, or thy sword,
True in his deed, and constant to his word;
Far as thy mind through backward time can see
Search all thy stores of faithful memory:
'Tis sacred truth I ask, and ask of thee."

To him experienced Nestor thus rejoin'd:
"O friend! what sorrows dost thou bring to mind!
Shall I the long, laborious scene review,
And open all the wounds of Greece anew?
What toils by sea! where dark in quest of prey
Dauntless we roved; Achilles led the way;
What toils by land! where mix'd in fatal fight
Such numbers fell, such heroes sunk to night;
There Ajax great, Achilles there the brave,
There wise Patroclus, fill an early grave:
There, too, my son--ah, once my best delight
Once swift of foot, and terrible in fight;
In whom stern courage with soft virtue join'd
A faultless body and a blameless mind;
Antilochus--What more can I relate?
How trace the tedious series of our fate?
Not added years on years my task could close,
The long historian of my country's woes;
Back to thy native islands might'st thou sail,
And leave half-heard the melancholy tale.
Nine painful years on that detested shore;
What stratagems we form'd, what toils we bore!
Still labouring on, till scarce at last we found
Great Jove propitious, and our conquest crown'd.
Far o'er the rest thy mighty father shined,
In wit, in prudence, and in force of mind.
Art thou the son of that illustrious sire?
With joy I grasp thee, and with love admire.
So like your voices, and your words so wise,
Who finds thee younger must consult his eyes.
Thy sire and I were one; nor varied aught
In public sentence, or in private thought;
Alike to council or the assembly came,
With equal souls, and sentiments the same.
But when (by wisdom won) proud Ilion burn'd,
And in their slips the conquering Greeks return'd,
'Twas God's high will the victors to divide,
And turn the event, confounding human pride;
Some be destroy'd, some scatter'd as the dust
(Not all were prudent, and not all were just).
Then Discord, sent by Pallas from above,
Stern daughter of the great avenger Jove,
The brother-kings inspired with fell debate;
Who call'd to council all the Achaian state,
But call'd untimely (not the sacred rite
Observed, nor heedful of the setting light,
Nor herald sword the session to proclaim),
Sour with debauch, a reeling tribe the came.
To these the cause of meeting they explain,
And Menelaus moves to cross the main;
Not so the king of men: be will'd to stay,
The sacred rites and hecatombs to pay,
And calm Minerva's wrath. Oh blind to fate!
The gods not lightly change their love, or hate.
With ireful taunts each other they oppose,
Till in loud tumult all the Greeks arose.
Now different counsels every breast divide,
Each burns with rancour to the adverse side;
The unquiet night strange projects entertain'd
(So Jove, that urged us to our fate, ordain'd).
We with the rising morn our ships unmoor'd,
And brought our captives and our stores aboard;
But half the people with respect obey'd
The king of men, and at his bidding stay'd.
Now on the wings of winds our course we keep
(For God had smooth'd the waters of the deep);
For Tenedos we spread our eager oars,
There land, and pay due victims to the powers;
To bless our safe return, we join in prayer;
But angry Jove dispersed our vows in air,
And raised new discord. Then (so Heaven decreed)
Ulysses first and Neator disagreed!
Wise as he was, by various counsels away'd,
He there, though late, to please the monarch, stay'd.
But I, determined, stem the foamy floods,
Warn'd of the coming fury of the gods.
With us, Tydides fear'd, and urged his haste:
And Menelads came, but came the last,
He join'd our vessels in the Lesbian bay,
While yet we doubted of our watery way;
If to the right to urge the pilot's toil
(The safer road), beside the Psyrian isle;
Or the straight course to rocky Chios plough,
And anchor under Mimas' shaggy brow?
We sought direction of the power divine:
The god propitious gave the guiding sign;
Through the mid seas he bid our navy steer,
And in Euboea shun the woes we fear.
The whistling winds already waked the sky;
Before the whistling winds the vessels fly,
With rapid swiftness cut the liquid way,
And reach Gerestus at the point of day.
There hecacombs of bulls, to Neptune slain,
High-flaming please the monarch of the main.
The fourth day shone, when all their labours o'er,
Tydides' vessels touched the wish'd-for shore.
But I to Pylos scud before the gales,
The god still breathing on my swelling sails;
Separate from all, I safely landed here;
Their fates or fortunes never reach'd my ear.
Yet what I learn'd, attend; as here I sat,
And ask'd each voyager each hero's fate;
Curious to know, and willing to relate.

"Safe reach'd the Myrmidons their native land,
Beneath Achilles' warlike son's command.
Those, whom the heir of great Apollo's art,
Brave Philoctetes, taught to wing the dart;
And those whom Idomen from Ilion's plain
Had led, securely cross'd the dreadful main
How Agamemnon touch'd his Argive coast,
And how his life by fraud and force he lost,
And how the murderer, paid his forfeit breath;
What lands so distant from that scene of death
But trembling heard the fame? and heard, admire.
How well the son appeased his slaughter'd sire!
Ev'n to the unhappy, that unjustly bleed,
Heaven gives posterity, to avenge the deed.
So fell Aegysthus; and mayest thou, my friend,
(On whom the virtues of thy sire descend,)
Make future times thy equal act adore,
And be what brave Orestes was before!"

The prudent youth replied: "O thou the grace
And lasting glory of the Grecian race!
Just was the vengeance, and to latest days
Shall long posterity resound the praise.
Some god this arm with equal prowess bless!
And the proud suitors shall its force confess;
Injurious men! who while my soul is sore
Of fresh affronts, are meditating more.
But Heaven denies this honour to my hand,
Nor shall my father repossess the land;
The father's fortune never to return,
And the sad son's to softer and to mourn!"
Thus he; and Nestor took the word: "My son,
Is it then true, as distant rumours run,
That crowds of rivals for thy mother's charms
Thy palace fill with insults and alarms?
Say, is the fault, through tame submission, thine?
Or leagued against thee, do thy people join,
Moved by some oracle, or voice divine?
And yet who knows, but ripening lies in fate
An hour of vengeance for the afflicted state;
When great Ulysses shall suppress these harms,
Ulysses singly, or all Greece in arms.
But if Athena, war's triumphant maid,
The happy son will as the father aid,
(Whose fame and safety was her constant care
In every danger and in every war:
Never on man did heavenly favour shine
With rays so strong, distinguish'd and divine,
As those with which Minerva mark'd thy sire)
So might she love thee, so thy soul inspire!
Soon should their hopes in humble dust be laid,
And long oblivion of the bridal bed."

"Ah! no such hope (the prince with sighs replies)
Can touch my breast; that blessing Heaven denies.
Ev'n by celestial favour were it given,
Fortune or fate would cross the will of Heaven."

"What words are these, and what imprudence thine?
(Thus interposed the martial maid divine)
Forgetful youth! but know, the Power above
With ease can save each object of his love;
Wide as his will, extends his boundless grace;
Nor lost in time nor circumscribed by place.
Happier his lot, who, many sorrows' pass'd,
Long labouring gains his natal shore at last;
Than who, too speedy, hastes to end his life
By some stern ruffian, or adulterous wife.
Death only is the lot which none can miss,
And all is possible to Heaven but this.
The best, the dearest favourite of the sky,
Must taste that cup, for man is born to die."

Thus check'd, replied Ulysses' prudent heir:
"Mentor, no more--the mournful thought forbear;
For he no more must draw his country's breath,
Already snatch'd by fate, and the black doom of death!
Pass we to other subjects; and engage
On themes remote the venerable sage
(Who thrice has seen the perishable kind
Of men decay, and through three ages shined
Like gods majestic, and like gods in mind);
For much he knows, and just conclusions draws,
From various precedents, and various laws.
O son of Neleus! awful Nestor, tell
How he, the mighty Agamemnon, fell;
By what strange fraud Aegysthus wrought, relate
(By force he could not) such a hero's fate?
Live Menelaus not in Greece? or where
Was then the martial brother's pious care?
Condemn'd perhaps some foreign short to tread;
Or sure Aegysthus had not dared the deed."
To whom the full of days: Illustrious youth,
Attend (though partly thou hast guess'd) the truth.
For had the martial Menelaus found
The ruffian breathing yet on Argive ground;
Nor earth had bid his carcase from the skies,
Nor Grecian virgins shriek'd his obsequies,
But fowls obscene dismember'd his remains,
And dogs had torn him on the naked plains.
While us the works of bloody Mars employ'd,
The wanton youth inglorious peace enjoy'd:
He stretch'd at ease in Argos' calm recess
(Whose stately steeds luxuriant pastures bless),
With flattery's insinuating art
Soothed the frail queen, and poison'd all her heard.
At first, with the worthy shame and decent pride,
The royal dame his lawless suit denied.
For virtue's image yet possess'd her mind.
Taught by a master of the tuneful kind;
Atrides, parting for the Trojan war,
Consign'd the youthful consort to his care.
True to his charge, the bard preserved her long
In honour's limits; such the power of song.
But when the gods these objects of their hate
Dragg'd to the destruction by the links of fate;
The bard they banish'd from his native soil,
And left all helpless in a desert isle;
There he, the sweetest of the sacred train,
Sung dying to the rocks, but sung in vain.
Then virtue was no more; her guard away,
She fell, to lust a voluntary prey.
Even to the temple stalk'd the adulterous spouse,
With impious thanks, and mockery of the vows,
With images, with garments, and with gold;
And odorous fumes from loaded altars roll'd.
"Meantime from flaming Troy we cut the way
With Menelaus, through the curling sea.
But when to Sunium's sacred point we came,
Crown'd with the temple of the Athenian dame;
Atride's pilot, Phrontes, there expired
(Phrontes, of all the songs of men admired
To steer the bounding bark with steady toil,
When the storm thickens, and the billows boil);
While yet he exercised the steerman's art,
Apollo touch'd him with his gentle dart;
Even with the rudder in his hand, he fell.
To pay whole honours to the shades of hell,
We check'd our haste, by pious office bound,
And laid our old companion in the ground.
And now the rites discharged, our course we keep
Far on the gloomy bosom of the deep:
Soon as Malae's misty tops arise,
Sudden the Thunderer blackens all the skies,
And the winds whistle, and the surges roll
Mountains on mountains, and obscure the pole.
The tempest scatters, and divides our fleet;
Part, the storm urges on the coast of Crete,
Where winding round the rich Cydonian plain,
The streams of Jardan issue to the main.
There stands a rock, high, eminent and steep,
Whose shaggy brow o'erhangs the shady deep,
And views Gortyna on the western side;
On this rough Auster drove the impetuous tide:
With broken force the billows roll'd away,
And heaved the fleet into the neighb'ring bay.
Thus saved from death, the gain'd the Phaestan shores,
With shatter'd vessels and disabled oars;
But five tall barks the winds and water toss'd,
Far from their fellows, on the Aegyptian coast.
There wander'd Menelaus through foreign shores
Amassing gold, and gathering naval stores;
While cursed Aegysthus the detested deed
By fraud fulfilled, and his great brother bled.
Seven years, the traitor rich Mycenae sway'd,
And his stern rule the groaning land obey'd;
The eighth, from Athens to his realm restored,
Orestes brandish'd the avenging sword,
Slew the dire pair, and gave to funeral flame
The vile assassin and adulterous dame.
That day, ere yet the bloody triumphs cease,
Return'd Atrides to the coast of Greece,
And safe to Argos port his navy brought,
With gifts of price and ponderous treasure fraught.
Hence warn'd, my son, beware! nor idly stand
Too long a stranger to thy native land;
Lest heedless absence wear thy wealth away,
While lawless feasters in thy palace away;
Perhaps may seize thy realm, and share the spoil;
And though return, with disappointed toil,
From thy vain journey, to a rifled isle.
However, my friend, indulge one labour more,
And seek Atrides on the Spartan shore.
He, wandering long a wider circle made,
And many-languaged nations has survey'd:
And measured tracks unknown to other ships,
Amid the monstrous wonders of the deeps,
(A length of ocean and unbounded sky.
Which scarce the sea-fowl in a year o'erfly);
Go then; to Sparta take the watery way,
Thy ship and sailors but for orders stay;
Or, if my land then choose thy course to bend,
My steeds, my chariots, and my songs, attend;
Thee to Atrides they shall safe convey,
Guides of thy road, companions of thy way.
Urge him with truth to frame his wise replies,
And sure he will; for Menelaus is wise."
Thus while he speaks the ruddy sun descends,
And twilight grey her evening shade extends.
Then thus the blue-eyed maid: "O full of days!
Wise are thy words, and just are all thy ways.
Now immolate the tongues, and mix the wine,
Sacred to Neptune and the powers divine,
The lamp of day is quench'd beneath the deep,
And soft approach the balmy hours of sleep;
Nor fits it to prolong the heavenly feast,
Timeless, indecent, but retire to rest."

So spake Jove's daughter, the celestial maid,
The sober train attended and obey'd.
The sacred heralds on their hands around
Pour'd the full urns; the youths the goblets crown'd;
From bowl to bowl the homely beverage flows;
While to the final sacrifice they rose.
The tongues they cast upon the fragrant flame,
And pour, above, the consecrated stream.
And now, their thirst by copious draughts allay'd,
The youthful hero and the Athenian maid
Propose departure from the finish'd rite,
And in their hollow bark to pass the night;
But this hospitable sage denied,
"Forbid it, Jove! and all the gods! (he cried),
Thus from my walls and the much-loved son to send
Of such a hero, and of such a friend!
Me, as some needy peasant, would ye leave,
Whom Heaven denies the blessing to relieve?
Me would ye leave, who boast imperial sway,
When beds of royal state invite your stay?
No--long as life this mortal shall inspire,
Or as my children imitate their sire.
Here shall the wandering stranger find his home,
And hospitable rites adorn the dome."

"Well hast thou spoke (the blue-eyed maid replies),
Beloved old man! benevolent as wise.
Be the kind dictates of thy heart obey'd,
And let thy words Telemachus persuade:
He to thy palace shall thy steps pursue;
I to the ship, to give the orders due,
Prescribe directions and confirm the crew.
For I alone sustain their naval cares,
Who boast experience from these silver hairs;
All youths the rest, whom to this journey move
Like years, like tempers, and their prince's love
There in the vessel shall I pass the night;
And, soon as morning paints the fields of light,
I go to challenge from the Caucons bold
A debt, contracted in the days of old,
But this, thy guest, received with friendly care
Let thy strong coursers swift to Sparta bear;
Prepare thy chariot at the dawn of day,
And be thy son companion of his way."

Then, turning with the word, Minerva flies,
And soars an eagle through the liquid skies.
Vision divine! the throng'd spectators gaze
In holy wonder fix'd, and still amaze.
But chief the reverend sage admired; he took
The hand of young Telemachus, and spoke:
"Oh, happy youth! and favoured of the skies,
Distinguished care of guardian deities!
Whose early years for future worth engage,
No vulgar manhood, no ignoble age.
For lo! none other of the course above,
Then she, the daughter of almighty Jove,
Pallas herself, the war-triumphant maid;
Confess'd is thine, as once thy fathers aid.
So guide me, goddess! so propitious shine
On me, my consort, and my royal line!
A yearling bullock to thy name shall smoke,
Untamed, unconscious of the galling yoke,
With ample forehead, and yet tender horns,
Whose budding honours ductile gold adorns."

Submissive thus the hoary sire preferr'd
His holy vow: the favouring goddess heard.
Then, slowly rising, o'er the sandy space
Precedes the father, follow'd by his race,
(A long procession) timely marching home
In comely order to the regal dome.
There when arrived, on thrones around him placed,
His sons and grandsons the wide circle graced.
To these the hospitable sage, in sign
Of social welcome, mix'd the racy wine
(Late from the mellowing cask restored to light,
By ten long years refined, and rosy bright).
To Pallas high the foaming bowl he crown'd,
And sprinkled large libations on the ground.
Each drinks a full oblivion of his cares,
And to the gifts of balmy sleep repairs.
Deep in a rich alcove the prince was laid,
And slept beneath the pompous colonnade;
Fast by his side Pisistratus was spread
(In age his equal) on a splendid bed:
But in an inner court, securely closed,
The reverend Nestor and his queen reposed.

When now Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
With rosy lustre purpled o'er the lawn,
The old man early rose, walk'd forth, and sate
On polish'd stone before his palace gate;
With unguents smooth the lucid marble shone,
Where ancient Neleus sate, a rustic throne;
But he descending to the infernal shade,
Sage Nestor fill'd it, and the sceptre sway'd.
His sons around him mild obeisance pay,
And duteous take the orders of the day.
First Eehephron and Stratius quit their bed;
Then Perseus, Aretus, and Thrasymed;
The last Pisistratus arose from rest:
They came, and near him placed the stranger-guest.
To these the senior thus declared his will:
"My sons! the dictates of your sire fulfil.
To Pallas, first of gods, prepare the feast,
Who graced our rites, a more than mortal guest
Let one, despatchful, bid some swain to lead
A well-fed bullock from the grassy mead;
One seek the harbour where the vessels moor,
And bring thy friends, Telemachus! ashore
(Leave only two the galley to attend);
Another Laerceus must we send,
Artist devine, whose skilful hands infold
The victim's horn with circumfusile gold.
The rest may here the pious duty share,
And bid the handmaids for the feast prepare,
The seats to range, the fragrant wood to bring,
And limpid waters from the living spring."

He said, and busy each his care bestow'd;
Already at the gates the bullock low'd,
Already came the Ithacensian crew,
The dexterous smith the tools already drew;
His ponderous hammer and his anvil sound,
And the strong tongs to turn the metal round.
Nor was Minerva absent from the rite,
She view'd her honours, and enjoyed the sight,
With reverend hand the king presents the gold,
Which round the intorted horns the gilder roll'd.
So wrought as Pallas might with pride behold.
Young Aretus from forth his bride bower
Brought the full laver, o'er their hands to pour,
And canisters of consecrated flour.
Stratius and Echephron the victim led;
The axe was held by warlike Thrasymed,
In act to strike; before him Perseus stood,
The vase extending to receive the blood.
The king himself initiates to the power:
Scatters with quivering hand the sacred flour,
And the stream sprinkles; from the curling brows
The hair collected in the fire he throws.
Soon as due vows on every part were paid,
And sacred wheat upon the victim laid,
Strong Thrasymed discharged the speeding blow
Full on his neck, and cut the nerves in two.
Down sunk the heavy beast; the females round
Maids, wives, and matrons, mix a shrilling sound.
Nor scorned the queen the holy choir to join
(The first born she, of old Clymenus' line:
In youth by Nestor loved, of spotless fame.
And loved in age, Eurydice her name).
From earth they rear him, struggling now with death;
And Nestor's youngest stops the vents of breath.
The soul for ever flies; on all sides round
Streams the black blood, and smokes upon the ground
The beast they then divide and disunite
The ribs and limbs, observant of the rite:
On these, in double cauls involved with art,
The choicest morsels lay from every part.
The sacred sage before his altar stands,
Turns the burnt offering with his holy hands,
And pours the wine, and bids the flames aspire;
The youth with instruments surround the fire.
The thighs now sacrificed, and entrails dress'd,
The assistants part, transfix, and broil the rest
While these officious tend the rites divine,
The last fair branch of the Nestorean line,
Sweet Polycaste, took the pleasing toil
To bathe the prince, and pour the fragrant oil.
O'er his fair limbs a flowery vest he throw,
And issued, like a god, to mortal view.
His former seat beside the king he found
(His people's father with his peers around);
All placed at ease the holy banquet join,
And in the dazzling goblet laughs the wine.

The rage of thirst and hunger now suppress'd,
The monarch turns him to his royal guest;
And for the promised journey bids prepare
The smooth hair'd horses, and the rapid car.
Observant of his word, tire word scarce spoke,
The sons obey, and join them to the yoke.
Then bread and wine a ready handmaid brings,
And presents, such as suit the state of kings.
The glittering seat Telemachus ascends;
His faithful guide Pisistratus attends;
With hasty hand the ruling reins he drew;
He lash'd the coursers, and the coursers flew.
Beneath the bounding yoke alike they hold
Their equal pace, and smoked along the field.
The towers of Pylos sink, its views decay,
Fields after fields fly back, till close of day;
Then sunk the sun, and darken'd all the way.

To Pherae now, Diocleus' stately seat
(Of Alpheus' race), the weary youths retreat.
His house affords the hospitable rite,
And pleased they sleep (the blessing of the night).
But when Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
With rosy lustre purpled o'er the lawn,
Again they mount, their journey to renew,
And from the sounding portico they flew.
Along the waving fields their way they hold
The fields receding as their chariot roll'd;
Then slowly sunk the ruddy globe of light,
And o'er the shaded landscape rush'd the night.

And now proud Sparta with their wheels resounds,
Sparta whose walls a range of hills surrounds;
At the fair dome the rapid labour ends;
Where sate Atrides 'midst his bridal friends,
With double vows invoking Hymen's power,
To bless his son's and daughter's nuptial hour.

That day, to great Achilles son resign'd,
Hermione, the fairest of her kind,
Was sent to crown the long-protracted joy,
Espoused before the final doom of Troy;
With steeds and gilded cars, a gorgeous train
Attend the nymphs to Phthia's distant reign.
Meanwhile at home, to Megapentha's bed
The virgin choir Alector's daughter led.
Brave Megapenthas From a stolen amour
To great Atrides' age his handmaid bore;
To Helen's bed the gods alone assign
Hermione, to extend the regal line;
On whom a radiant pomp oh Graces wait,
Resembling Venus in attractive state.

While this gay friendly troop the king surround,
With festival and mirth the roofs resound;
A bard amid the joyous circle sings
High airs attemper'd to the vocal strings;
Whilst warbling to the varied strain, advance
Two sprightly youths to form the bounding dance,
'Twas then, that issuing through the palace gate,
The splendid car roll'd slow in regal state:
On the bright eminence young Nestor shone,
And fast beside him great Ulysses' son;
Grave Eteoneous saw the pomp appear,
And speeding, thus address'd the royal ear;

"Two youths approach, whose semblant features prove
Their blood devolving from the source of Jove
Is due reception deign'd, or must they bend
Their doubtful course to seek a distant friend?"

"Insensate! (with a sigh the king replies,)
Too long, misjudging, have I thought thee wise
But sure relentless folly steals thy breast,
Obdurate to reject the stranger-guest;
To those dear hospitable rites a foe,
Which in my wanderings oft relieved my woe;
Fed by the bounty of another's board,
Till pitying Jove my native realm restored--
Straight be the coursers from the car released,
Conduct the youths to grace the genial feast."

The seneschal, rebuked, in haste withdrew;
With equal haste a menial train pursue:
Part led the coursers, from the car enlarged,
Each to a crib with choicest grain surcharged;
Part in a portico, profusely graced
With rich magnificence, the chariot placed;
Then to the dome the friendly pair invite,
Who eye the dazzling roofs with vast delight;
Resplendent as the blaze of summer noon,
Or the pale radiance of the midnight moon.
From room to room their eager view they bend
Thence to the bath, a beauteous pile, descend;
Where a bright damsel train attends the guests
With liquid odours, and embroider'd vests.
Refresh'd, they wait them to the bower of state,
Where, circled with his pears, Atrides sate;
Throned next the king, a fair attendant brings
The purest product of the crystal springs;
High on a massy vase of silver mould,
The burnish'd laver flames with solid gold,
In solid gold the purple vintage flows,
And on the board a second banquet rose.
When thus the king, with hospitable port;
"Accept this welcome to the Spartan court:
The waste of nature let the feast repair,
Then your high lineage and your names declare;
Say from what sceptred ancestry ye claim,
Recorded eminent in deathless fame,
For vulgar parents cannot stamp their race
With signatures of such majestic grace."

Ceasing, benevolent he straight assigns
The royal portion of the choicest chines
To each accepted friend; with grateful haste
They share the honours of the rich repast.
Sufficed, soft whispering thus to Nestor's son,
His head reclined, young Ithacus begun:

"View'st thou unmoved, O ever-honour'd most!
These prodigies of art, and wondrous cost!
Above, beneath, around the palace shines
The sunless treasure of exhausted mines;
The spoils of elephants the roofs inlay,
And studded amber darts the golden ray;
Such, and not nobler, in the realms above
My wonder dictates is the dome of Jove."

The monarch took the word, and grave replied:
"Presumptuous are the vaunts, and vain the pride
Of man, who dares in pomp with Jove contest,
Unchanged, immortal, and supremely blest!
With all my affluence, when my woes are weigh'd,
Envy will own the purchase dearly paid.
For eight slow-circling years, by tempests toss'd,
From Cypress to the far Phoenician coast
(Sidon the capital), I stretch'd my toil
Through regions fatten'd with the flows of Nile.
Next Aethiopia's utmost bound explore,
And the parch'd borders of the Arabian shore;
Then warp my voyage on the southern gales,
O'er the warm Lybian wave to spread my sails;
That happy clime, where each revolving year
The teeming ewes a triple offspring bear;
And two fair crescents of translucent horn
The brows of all their young increase adorn:
The shepherd swains, with sure abundance blest,
On the fat flock and rural dainties feast;
Nor want of herbage makes the dairy fail,
But every season fills the foaming pail.
Whilst, heaping unwash'd wealth, I distant roam,
The best of brothers, at his natal home,
By the dire fury of a traitress wife,
Ends the sad evening of a stormy life;
Whence, with incessant grief my soul annoy'd,
These riches are possess'd, but not enjoy'd!
My wars, the copious theme of every tongue,
To you your fathers have recorded long.
How favouring Heaven repaid my glorious toils
With a sack'd palace, and barbaric spoils.
Oh! had the gods so large a boon denied
And life, the just equivalent supplied
To those brave warriors, who, with glory fired
Far from their country, in my cause expired!
Still in short intervals of pleasing woe.
Regardful of the friendly dues I owe,
I to the glorious dead, for ever dear!
Indulge the tribute of a grateful tear.
But oh! Ulysses--deeper than the rest
That sad idea wounds my anxious breast!
My heart bleeds fresh with agonizing pain;
The bowl and tasteful viands tempt in vain;
Nor sleep's soft power can close my streaming eyes,
When imaged to my soul his sorrows rise.
No peril in my cause he ceased to prove,
His labours equall'd only by my love:
And both alike to bitter fortune born,
For him to suffer, and for me to mourn!
Whether he wanders on some friendly coast,
Or glides in Stygian gloom a pensive ghost,
No fame reveals; but, doubtful of his doom,
His good old sire with sorrow to the tomb
Declines his trembling steps; untimely care
Withers the blooming vigour of his heir;
And the chaste partner of his bed and throne
Wastes all her widow'd hours in tender moan."

While thus pathetic to the prince he spoke,
From the brave youth the streaming passion broke;
Studious to veil the grief, in vain repress'd,
His face he shrouded with his purple vest.
The conscious monarch pierced the coy disguise,
And view'd his filial love with vast surprise:
Dubious to press the tender theme, or wait
To hear the youth inquire his father's fate.
In this suspense bright Helen graced the room;
Before her breathed a gale of rich perfume.
So moves, adorn'd with each attractive grace,
The silver shafted goddess of the chase!
The seat of majesty Adraste brings,
With art illustrious, for the pomp of kings;
To spread the pall (beneath the regal chair)
Of softest wool, is bright Alcippe's care.
A silver canister, divinely wrought,
In her soft hands the beauteous Phylo brought;
To Sparta's queen of old the radiant vase
Alcandra gave, a pledge of royal grace;
For Polybus her lord (whose sovereign sway
The wealthy tribes of Pharian Thebes obey),
When to that court Atrides came, caress'd
With vast munificence the imperial guest:
Two lavers from the richest ore refined,
With silver tripods, the kind host assign'd;
And bounteous from the royal treasure told
Ten equal talents of refulgent gold.
Alcandra, consort of his high command,
A golden distaff gave to Helen's hand;
And that rich vase, with living sculpture wrought,
Which heap'd with wool the beauteous Phylo brought
The silken fleece, impurpled for the loom,
Rivall'd the hyacinth in vernal bloom.
The sovereign seat then Jove born Helen press'd,
And pleasing thus her sceptred lord address'd:

"Who grace our palace now, that friendly pair,
Speak they their lineage, or their names declare?
Uncertain of the truth, yet uncontroll'd,
Hear me the bodings of my breast unfold.
With wonder wrapp'd on yonder check I trace
The feature of the Ulyssean race:
Diffused o'er each resembling line appear,
In just similitude, the grace and air
Of young Telemachus! the lovely boy,
Who bless'd Ulysses with a father's joy,
What time the Greeks combined their social arms,
To avenge the stain of my ill-fated charms!"

"Just is thy thought, (the king assenting cries,)
Methinks Ulysses strikes my wondering eyes;
Full shines the father in the filial frame,
His port, his features, and his shape the same;
Such quick regards his sparkling eyes bestow;
Such wavy ringlets o'er his shoulders flow
And when he heard the long disastrous store
Of cares, which in my cause Ulysses bore;
Dismay'd, heart-wounded with paternal woes,
Above restraint the tide of sorrow rose;
Cautious to let the gushing grief appear,
His purple garment veil'd the falling tear."

"See there confess'd (Pisistratus replies)
The genuine worth of Ithacus the wise!
Of that heroic sire the youth is sprung,
But modest awe hath chain'd his timorous tongue.
Thy voice, O king! with pleased attention heard,
Is like the dictates of a god revered.
With him, at Nestor's high command, I came,
Whose age I honour with a parent's name.
By adverse destiny constrained to sue
For counsel and redress, he sues to you
Whatever ill the friendless orphan bears,
Bereaved of parents in his infant years,
Still must the wrong'd Telemachus sustain,
If, hopeful of your aid, he hopes in vain;
Affianced in your friendly power alone,
The youth would vindicate the vacant throne."

"Is Sparta blest, and these desiring eyes
View my friend's son? (the king exalting cries;)
Son of my friend, by glorious toils approved,
Whose sword was sacred to the man he loved;
Mirror of constant faith, revered and mourn'd--
When Troy was ruin'd, had the chief return'd,
No Greek an equal space had ere possess'd,
Of dear affection, in my grateful breast.
I, to confirm the mutual joys we shared,
For his abode a capital prepared;
Argos, the seat of sovereign rule, I chose;
Fair in the plan the future palace rose,
Where my Ulysses and his race might reign,
And portion to his tribes the wide domain,
To them my vassals had resign'd a soil,
With teeming plenty to reward their toil.
There with commutual zeal we both had strove
In acts of dear benevolence and love:
Brothers in peace, not rivals in command,
And death alone dissolved the friendly band!
Some envious power the blissful scene destroys;
Vanish'd are all the visionary joys;
The soul of friendship to my hope is lost,
Fated to wander from his natal coast!"

He ceased; a gush of grief began to rise:
Fast streams a tide from beauteous Helen's eyes;
Fast for the sire the filial sorrows flow;
The weeping monarch swells the mighty woe;
Thy cheeks, Pisistratus, the tears bedew,
While pictured so thy mind appear'd in view,
Thy martial brother; on the Phrygian plain
Extended pale, by swarthy Memnon slain!
But silence soon the son of Nestor broke,
And melting with fraternal pity, spoke:

"Frequent, O king, was Nestor wont to raise
And charm attention with thy copious praise;
To crowd thy various gifts, the sage assign'd
The glory of a firm capacious mind;
With that superior attribute control
This unavailing impotence of soul,
Let not your roof with echoing grief resound,
Now for the feast the friendly bowl is crown'd;
But when, from dewy shade emerging bright,
Aurora streaks the sky with orient light,
Let each deplore his dead; the rites of woe
Are all, alas! the living can bestow;
O'er the congenial dust enjoin'd to shear
The graceful curl, and drop the tender tear.
Then, mingling in the mournful pomp with you,
I'll pay my brother's ghost a warrior's due,
And mourn the brave Antilochus, a name
Not unrecorded in the rolls of fame;
With strength and speed superior form'd, in fight
To face the foe, or intercept his flight;
Too early snatch'd by fate ere known to me!
I boast a witness of his worth in thee."

"Young and mature! (the monarch thus rejoins,)
In thee renew'd the soul of Nestor shines;
Form'd by the care of that consummate sage,
In early bloom an oracle of age.
Whene'er his influence Jove vouchsafes to shower,
To bless the natal and the nuptial hour;
From the great sire transmissive to the race,
The boon devolving gives distinguish'd grace.
Such, happy Nestor! was thy glorious doom,
Around thee, full of years, thy offspring bloom.
Expert of arms, and prudent in debate;
The gifts of Heaven to guard thy hoary state.
But now let each becalm his troubled breast,
Wash, and partake serene the friendly feast.
To move thy suit, Telemachus, delay,
Till heaven's revolving lamp restores the day."

He said, Asphalion swift the laver brings;
Alternate, all partake the grateful springs;
Then from the rites of purity repair,
And with keen gust the savoury viands share.
Meantime, with genial joy to warm the soul,
Bright Helen mix'd a mirth inspiring bowl;
Temper'd with drugs of sovereign use, to assuage
The boiling bosom of tumultuous rage;
To clear the cloudy front of wrinkled Care,
And dry the tearful sluices of Despair;
Charm'd with that virtuous draught, the exalted mind
All sense of woe delivers to the wind.
Though on the blazing pile his parent lay.
Or a loved brother groan'd his life away.
Or darling son, oppress'd by ruffian force,
Fell breathless at his feet, a mangled corse;
From morn to eve, impassive and serene,
The man entranced would view the dreadful scene
These drugs, so friendly to the joys of life.
Bright Helen learn'd from Thone's imperial wife;
Who sway'd the sceptre, where prolific Nile
With various simples clothes the fatten'd soil.
With wholesome herbage mix'd, the direful bane
Of vegetable venom taints the plain;
From Paeon sprung, their patron-god imparts
To all the Pharian race his healing arts.
The beverage now prepared to inspire the feast,
The circle thus the beauteous queen addressed:

"Throned in omnipotence, supremest Jove
Tempers the fates of human race above;
By the firm sanction of his sovereign will,
Alternate are decreed our good and ill.
To feastful mirth be this white hour assign'd.
And sweet discourse, the banquet of the mind
Myself, assisting in the social joy,
Will tell Ulysses' bold exploit in Troy,
Sole witness of the deed I now declare
Speak you (who saw) his wonders in the war.

"Seam'd o'er with wounds, which his own sabre gave,
In the vile habit of a village slave,
The foe deceived, he pass'd the tented plain,
In Troy to mingle with the hostile train.
In this attire secure from searching eyes,
Till happily piercing through the dark disguise,
The chief I challenged; he, whose practised wit
Knew all the serpent mazes of deceit,
Eludes my search; but when his form I view'd
Fresh from the bath, with fragrant oils renew'd,
His limbs in military purple dress'd,
Each brightening grace the genuine Greek confess'd.
A previous pledge of sacred faith obtain'd,
Till he the lines and Argive fleet regain'd,
To keep his stay conceal'd; the chief declared
The plans of war against the town prepared.
Exploring then the secrets of the state,
He learn'd what best might urge the Dardan fate;
And, safe returning to the Grecian host,
Sent many a shade to Pluto's dreary coast.
Loud grief resounded through the towers of Troy,
But my pleased bosom glow'd with secret joy:
For then, with dire remorse and conscious shame
I view'd the effects of that disastrous flame.
Which, kindled by the imperious queen of love,
Constrain'd me from my native realm to rove:
And oft in bitterness of soul deplored
My absent daughter and my dearer lord;
Admired among the first of human race,
For every gift of mind and manly grace."

"Right well (replied the king) your speech displays
The matchless merit of the chief you praise:
Heroes in various climes myself have found,
For martial deeds and depth of thought renown'd;
But Ithacus, unrivall'd in his claim,
May boast a title to the loudest fame:
In battle calm he guides the rapid storm,
Wise to resolve, and patient to perform.
What wondrous conduct in the chief appear'd,
When the vast fabric of the steed we rear'd!
Some demon, anxious for the Trojan doom,
Urged you with great Deiphobus to come,
To explore the fraud; with guile opposed to guile.
Slow-pacing thrice around the insidious pile,
Each noted leader's name you thrice invoke,
Your accent varying as their spouses spoke!
The pleasing sounds each latent warrior warm'd,
But most Tydides' and coy heart alarm'd:
To quit the steed we both impatient press
Threatening to answer from the dark recess.
Unmoved the mind of Ithacus remain'd;
And the vain ardours of our love restrain'd;
But Anticlus, unable to control,
Spoke loud the language of his yearning soul:
Ulysses straight, with indignation fired
(For so the common care of Greece required),
Firm to his lips his forceful hands applied,
Till on his tongue the fluttering murmurs died.
Meantime Minerva, from the fraudful horse,
Back to the court of Priam bent your course."

"Inclement fate! (Telemachus replies,)
Frail is the boasted attribute of wise:
The leader mingling with the vulgar host,
Is in the common mass of matter lost!
But now let sleep the painful waste repair
Of sad reflection and corroding care."
He ceased; the menial fair that round her wait,
At Helen's beck prepare the room of state;
Beneath an ample portico they spread
The downy fleece to form the slumberous bed;
And o'er soft palls of purple grain unfold
Rich tapestry, stiff with interwoven gold:
Then, through the illumined dome, to balmy rest
The obsequious herald guides each princely guest;
While to his regal bower the king ascends,
And beauteous Helen on her lord attends.
Soon as the morn, in orient purple dress'd,
Unbarr'd the portal of the roseate east,
The monarch rose; magnificent to view,
The imperial mantle o'er his vest he threw;
The glittering zone athwart his shoulders cast,
A starry falchion low-depending graced;
Clasp'd on his feet the embroidered sandals shine;
And forth he moves, majestic and divine,
Instant to young Telemachus he press'd;
And thus benevolent his speech addressed:

"Say, royal youth, sincere of soul report
Whit cause hath led you to the Spartan court?
Do public or domestic care constrain
This toilsome voyage o'er the surgy main?"

"O highly-flavour'd delegate of Jove!
(Replies the prince) inflamed with filial love,
And anxious hope, to hear my parent's doom,
A suppliant to your royal court I come:
Our sovereign seat a lewd usurping race
With lawless riot and misrule disgrace;
To pamper'd insolence devoted fall
Prime of the flock, and choicest of the stall:
For wild ambition wings their bold desire,
And all to mount the imperial bed aspire.
But prostrate I implore, O king! relate
The mournful series of my father's fate:
Each known disaster of the man disclose,
Born by his mother to a world of woes!
Recite them; nor in erring pity fear
To wound with storied grief the filial ear.
If e'er Ulysses, to reclaim your right,
Avow'd his zeal in council or in fight,
If Phrygian camps the friendly toils attest,
To the sire's merit give the son's request."

Deep from his inmost soul Atrides sigh'd,
And thus, indignant, to the prince replied:
"Heavens! would a soft, inglorious, dastard train
An absent hero's nuptial joys profane!
So with her young, amid the woodland shades,
A timorous hind the lion's court invades,
Leaves in the fatal lair the tender fawns,
Climbs the green cliff, or feeds the flowery lawns:
Meantime return'd, with dire remorseless sway,
The monarch-savage rends the trembling prey.
With equal fury, and with equal fame,
Ulysses soon shall reassert his claim.
O Jove supreme, whom gods and men revere!
And thou! to whom 'tis given to gild the sphere!
With power congenial join'd, propitious aid
The chief adopted by the martial maid!
Such to our wish the warrior soon restore,
As when contending on the Lesbian shore
His prowess Philomelidies confess'd,
And loud-acclaiming Greeks the victor bless'd;
Then soon the invaders of his bed and throne
Their love presumptuous shall with life atone.
With patient ear, O royal youth, attend
The storied labour of thy father's friend:
Fruitful of deeds, the copious tale is long,
But truth severe shall dictate to my tongue:
Learn what I heard the sea-born seer relate,
Whose eye can pierce the dark recess of fate.

"Long on the Egyptian coast by calms confined,
Heaven to my fleet refused a prosperous wind;
No vows had we preferr'd, nor victims slain!
For this the gods each favouring gale restrain
Jealous, to see their high behests obey'd;
Severe, if men the eternal rights evade.
High o'er a gulfy sea, the Pharian isle
Fronts the deep roar of disemboguing Nile:
Her distance from the shore, the course begun
At dawn, and ending with the setting sun,
A galley measures; when the stiffer gales
Rise on the poop, and fully stretch the sails.
There, anchor'd vessels safe in harbour lie,
Whilst limpid springs the failing cask supply.

"And now the twentieth sun, descending, laves
His glowing axle in the western waves:
Still with expanded sails we court in vain
Propitious winds to waft us o'er the main;
And the pale mariner at once deplores
His drooping vigour and exhausted stores.
When lo! a bright cerulean form appears,
Proteus her sire divine. With pity press'd,
Me sole the daughter of the deep address'd;
What time, with hunger pined, my absent mates
Roam the wide isle in search of rural cates,
Bait the barb'd steel, and from the fishy flood
Appease the afflictive fierce desire of food."

"'Whoe'er thou art (the azure goddess cries)
Thy conduct ill-deserves the praise of wise:
Is death thy choice, or misery thy boast,
That here inglorious, on a barren coast,
Thy brave associates droop, a meagre train,
With famine pale, and ask thy care in vain?'
"Struck with the loud reproach, I straight reply:
'Whate'er thy title in thy native sky,
A goddess sure! for more than moral grace
Speaks thee descendant of ethereal race;
Deem not that here of choice my fleet remains;
Some heavenly power averse my stay constrains:
O, piteous of my fate, vouchsafe to show
(For what's sequester'd from celestial view?)
What power becalms the innavigable seas?
What guilt provokes him, and what vows appease?'

"I ceased, when affable the goddess cried:
'Observe, and in the truths I speak confide;
The oracular seer frequents the Pharian coast,
From whose high bed my birth divine I boast;
Proteus, a name tremendous o'er the main,
The delegate of Neptune's watery reign.
Watch with insidious care his known abode;
There fast in chains constrain the various god;
Who bound, obedient to superior force,
Unerring will prescribe your destined course.
If, studious on your realms, you then demand
Their state, since last you left your natal land,
Instant the god obsequious will disclose
Bright tracts of glory or a cloud of woes.'

"She ceased; and suppliant thus I made reply:
'O goddess I on thy aid my hopes rely;
Dictate propitious to my duteous ear,
What arts can captivate the changeful seer;
For perilous the assay, unheard the toil,
To elude the prescience of a god by guile.'

"Thus to the goddess mild my suit I end.
Then she: 'Obedient to my rule attend:
When through the zone of heaven the mounted sun
Hath journeyed half, and half remains to run;
The seer, while zephyrs curl the swelling deep,
Basks on the breezy shore, in grateful sleep,
His oozy limbs. Emerging from the wave,
The Phocas swift surround his rocky cave,
Frequent and full; the consecrated train
Of her, whose azure trident awes the main;
There wallowing warm, the enormous herd exhales
An oily steam, and taints the noontide gales.
To that recess, commodious for surprise,
When purple light shall next suffuse the skies,
With me repair; and from thy warrior-band
Three chosen chiefs of dauntless soul command;
Let their auxiliar force befriend the toil;
For strong the god, and perfected in guile.
Strech'd on the shelly shore, he first surveys
The flouncing herd ascending from the seas;
Their number summ'd, reposed in sleep profound
The scaly charge their guardian god surround;
So with his battening flocks the careful swain
Abides pavilion'd on the grassy plain.
With powers united, obstinately bold,
Invade him, couch'd amid the scaly fold;
Instant he wears, elusive of the rape,
The mimic force of every savage shape;
Or glides with liquid lapse a murmuring stream,
Or, wrapp'd in flame, he glows at every limb.
Yet, still retentive, with redoubled might,
Through each vain passive form constrain his flight
But when, his native shape renamed, he stands
Patient of conquest, and your cause demands;
The cause that urged the bold attempt declare,
And soothe the vanquish'd with a victor's prayer.
The bands releas'd, implore the seer to say
What godhead interdicts the watery way.
Who, straight propitious, in prophetic strain
Will teach you to repass the unmeasured main.
She ceased, and bounding from the shelfy shore,
Round the descending nymph the waves resounding roar.

"High wrapp'd in wonder of the future deed,
with joy impetuous to the port I speed:
The wants of nature with repast suffice,
Till night with grateful shade involved the skies,
And shed ambrosial dews. Fast by the deep,
Along the tented shore, in balmy sleep,
Our cares were lost. When o'er the eastern lawn,
In saffron robes, the daughter of the dawn
Advanced her rosy steps, before the bay
Due ritual honours to the gods I pay;
Then seek the place the sea-born nymph assign'd,
With three associates of undaunted mind.
Arrived, to form along the appointed strand
For each a bed, she scoops the hilly sand;
Then, from her azure cave the finny spoils
Of four vast Phocae takes, to veil her wiles;
Beneath the finny spoils extended prone,
Hard toil! the prophet's piercing eye to shun;
New from the corse, the scaly frauds diffuse
Unsavoury stench of oil, and brackish ooze;
But the bright sea-maid's gentle power implored,
With nectar'd drops the sickening sense restored.

"Thus till the sun had travell'd half the skies,
Ambush'd we lie, and wait the bold emprise;
When, thronging quick to bask in open air,
The flocks of ocean to the strand repair;
Couch'd on the sunny sand, the monsters sleep;
Then Proteus, mounting from the hoary deep,
Surveys his charge, unknowing of deceit;
(In order told, we make the sum complete.)
Pleased with the false review, secure he lies,
And leaden slumbers press his drooping eyes.
Rushing impetuous forth, we straight prepare
A furious onset with the sound of war,
And shouting seize the god; our force to evade,
His various arts he soon resumes in aid;
A lion now, he curls a surgy mane;
Sudden our hands a spotted paid restrain;
Then, arm'd with tusks, and lightning in his eyes,
A boar's obscener shape the god belies;
On spiry volumes, there a dragon rides;
Here, from our strict embrace a stream he glides.
At last, sublime, his stately growth he rears
A tree, and well-dissembled foliage wears.
Vain efforts with superior power compress'd,
Me with reluctance thus the seer address'd;
'Say, son of Atreus, say what god inspired
This daring fraud, and what the boon desired?'
I thus: 'O thou, whose certain eye foresees
The fix'd event of fate's remote decrees;
After long woes, and various toil endured,
Still on this desert isle my fleet is moor'd,
Unfriended of the gales.  All-knowing, say,
What godhead interdicts the watery way?
What vows repentant will the power appease,
To speed a prosperous voyage o'er the seas.'

"'To Jove (with stern regard the god replies)
And all the offended synod of the skies,
Just hecatombs with due devotion slain,
Thy guilt absolved, a prosperous voyage gain.
To the firm sanction of thy fate attend!
An exile thou, nor cheering face of friend,
Nor sight of natal shore, nor regal dome,
Shalt yet enjoy, but still art doom'd to roam.
Once more the Nile, who from the secret source
Of Jove's high seat descends with sweepy force,
Must view his billows white beneath thy oar,
And altars blaze along his sanguine shore.
Then will the gods with holy pomp adored,
To thy long vows a safe return accord.'

"He ceased: heart wounded with afflictive pain,
(Doom'd to repeat the perils of the main,
A shelfy track and long!) 'O seer' I cry,
'To the stern sanction of the offended sky
My prompt obedience bows. But deign to say
What fate propitious, or what dire dismay,
Sustain those peers, the relics of our host,
Whom I with Nestor on the Phrygian coast
Embracing left? Must I the warriors weep,
Whelm'd in the bottom of the monstrous deep?
Or did the kind domestic friend deplore
The breathless heroes on their native shore?

"'Press not too far,' replied the god: 'but cease
To know what, known, will violate thy peace;
Too curious of their doom! with friendly woe
Thy breast will heave, and tears eternal flow.
Part live! the rest, a lamentable train!
Range the dark bounds of Pluto's dreary reign.
Two, foremost in the roll of Mars renown'd,
Whose arms with conquest in thy cause were crown'd,
Fell by disastrous fate: by tempests toss'd,
A third lives wretched on a distant coast.

"By Neptune rescued from Minerva's hate,
On Gyrae, safe Oilean Ajax sate,
His ship o'erwhelm'd; but, frowning on the floods,
Impious he roar'd defiance to the gods;
To his own prowess all the glory gave:
The power defrauding who vouchsafed to save.
This heard the raging ruler of the main;
His spear, indignant for such high disdain,
He launched; dividing with his forky mace
The aerial summit from the marble base:
The rock rush'd seaward, with impetuous roar
Ingulf'd, and to the abyss the boaster bore.

"By Juno's guardian aid, the watery vast,
Secure of storms, your royal brother pass'd,
Till, coasting nigh the cape where Malen shrouds
Her spiry cliffs amid surrounding clouds,
A whirling gust tumultuous from the shore
Across the deep his labouring vessel bore.
In an ill-fated hour the coast he gain'd,
Where late in regal pomp Thyestes reigned;
But, when his hoary honours bow'd to fate,
Aegysthus govern'd in paternal state,
The surges now subside, the tempest ends;
From his tall ship the king of men descends;
There fondly thinks the gods conclude his toil:
Far from his own domain salutes the soil;
With rapture oft the urge of Greece reviews,
And the dear turf with tears of joy bedews.
Him, thus exulting on the distant stand,
A spy distinguish'd from his airy stand;
To bribe whose vigilance, Aegysthus told
A mighty sum of ill-persuading gold:
There watch'd this guardian of his guilty fear,
Till the twelfth moon had wheel'd her pale career;
And now, admonish'd by his eye, to court
With terror wing'd conveys the dread report.
Of deathful arts expert, his lord employs
The ministers of blood in dark surprise;
And twenty youths, in radiant mail incased,
Close ambush'd nigh the spacious hall he placed.
Then bids prepare the hospitable treat:
Vain shows of love to veil his felon hate!
To grace the victor's welcome from the wars,
A train of coursers and triumphal cars
Magnificent he leads: the royal guest,
Thoughtless of ill, accepts the fraudful feast.
The troop forth-issuing from the dark recess,
With homicidal rage the king oppress!
So, whilst he feeds luxurious in the stall,
The sovereign of the herd is doomed to fall,
The partners of his fame and toils at Troy,
Around their lord, a mighty ruin, lie:
Mix'd with the brave, the base invaders bleed;
Aegysthus sole survives to boast the deed."

He said: chill horrors shook my shivering soul,
Rack'd wish convulsive pangs in dust I roll;
And hate, in madness of extreme despair,
To view the sun, or breathe the vital air.
But when, superior to the rage of woe,
I stood restored and tears had ceased to flow,
Lenient of grief the pitying god began:
'Forget the brother, and resume the man.
To Fate's supreme dispose the dead resign,
That care be Fate's, a speedy passage thine
Still lives the wretch who wrought the death deplored,
But lives a victim for thy vengeful sword;
Unless with filial rage Orestes glow,
And swift prevent the meditated blow:
You timely will return a welcome guest,
With him to share the sad funereal feast."

"He said: new thoughts my beating heart employ,
My gloomy soul receives a gleam of joy.
Fair hope revives; and eager I address'd
The prescient godhead to reveal the rest:
'The doom decreed of those disastrous two
I've heard with pain, but oh! the tale pursue;
What third brave son of Mars the Fates constrain
To roam the howling desert of the main;
Or, in eternal shade of cold he lies,
Provoke new sorrows from these grateful eyes.'

"'That chief (rejoin'd the god) his race derives
From Ithaca, and wondrous woes survives;
Laertes' son: girt with circumfluous tides,
He still calamitous constraint abides.
Him in Calypso's cave of late! view'd,
When streaming grief his faded cheek bedow'd.
But vain his prayer, his arts are vain, to move
The enamour'd goddess, or elude her love:
His vessel sunk, and dear companions lost,
He lives reluctant on a foreign coast.
But oh, beloved by Heaven! reserved to thee
A happier lot the smiling Fates decree:
Free from that law, beneath whose mortal sway
Matter is changed, and varying forms decay,
Elysium shall be thine: the blissful plains
Of utmost earth, where Rhadamanthus reigns.
Joys ever young, unmix'd with pain or fear,
Fill the wide circle of the eternal year:
Stern winter smiles on that auspicious clime:
The fields are florid with unfading prime;
From the bleak pole no winds inclement blow,
Mould the round hail, or flake the fleecy snow;
But from the breezy deep the blest inhale
The fragrant murmurs of the western gale.
This grace peculiar will the gods afford
To thee, the son of Jove, and beauteous Helen's lord.'

"He ceased, and plunging in the vast profound,
Beneath the god and whirling billows bound.
Then speeding back, involved in various thought,
My friends attending at the shore I sought,
Arrived, the rage of hunger we control
Till night with silent shade invests the pole;
Then lose the cares of life in pleasing rest.
Soon as the morn reveals the roseate east,
With sails we wing the masts, our anchors weigh,
Unmoor the fleet, and rush into the sea.
Ranged on the banks, beneath our equal oars
White curl the waves, and the vex'd ocean roars
Then, steering backward from the Pharian isle,
We gain the stream of Jove-descended Nile;
There quit the ships, and on the destined shore
With ritual hecatombs the gods adore;
Their wrath atoned, to Agamemnon's name
A cenotaph I raise of deathless fame.
These rites to piety and grief discharged,
The friendly gods a springing gale enlarged;
The fleet swift tilting o'er the surges flew,
Till Grecian cliffs appear'd a blissful view!

"Thy patient ear hath heard me long relate
A story, fruitful of disastrous fate.
And now, young prince, indulge my fond request;
Be Sparta honoured with his royal guest,
Till, from his eastern goal, the joyous sun
His twelfth diurnal race begins to run.
Meantime my train the friendly gifts prepare,
The sprightly coursers and a polish'd car;
With these a goblet of capacious mould,
Figured with art to dignify the gold
(Form'd for libation to the gods), shall prove
A pledge and monument of sacred love."

"My quick return (young Ithacus rejoin'd),
Damps the warm wishes of my raptured mind;
Did not my fate my needful haste constrain,
Charm'd by your speech so graceful and humane,
Lost in delight the circling year would roll,
While deep attention fix'd my listening soul.
But now to Pyle permit my destined way,
My loved associates chide my long delay:
In dear remembrance of your royal grace,
I take the present of the promised vase;
The coursers, for the champaign sports retain;
That gift our barren rocks will render vain:
Horrid with cliffs, our meagre land allows
Thin herbage for the mountain goat to browse,
But neither mead nor plain supplies, to feed
The sprightly courser, or indulge his speed:
To sea-surrounded realms the gods assign
Small tract of fertile lawn, the least to mine."

His hand the king with tender passion press'd,
And, smiling, thus the royal youth address'd:
"O early worth! a soul so wise, and young,
Proclaims you from the sage Ulysses sprung.
Selected from my stores, of matchless price,
An urn shall recompense your prudent choice;
By Vulcan's art, the verge with gold enchased.
A pledge the sceptred power of Sidon gave,
When to his realm I plough'd the orient wave."

Thus they alternate; while, with artful care,
The menial train the regal feast prepare.
The firstlings of the flock are doom'd to die:
Rich fragrant wines the cheering bowl supply;
A female band the gift of Ceres bring;
And the gilt roofs with genial triumph ring.

Meanwhile, in Ithaca, the suitor powers
In active games divide their jovial hours;
In areas varied with mosaic art,
Some whirl the disk, and some the javelin dart,
Aside, sequester'd from the vast resort,
Antinous sole spectator of the sport;
With great Eurymachus, of worth confess'd,
And high descent, superior to the rest;
Whom young Noemon lowly thus address'd:--

"My ship, equipp'd within the neighboring port,
The prince, departing for the Pylian court,
Requested for his speed; but, courteous, say
When steers he home, or why this long delay?
For Elis I should sail with utmost speed.
To import twelve mares which there luxurious feed,
And twelve young mules, a strong laborious race,
New to the plow, unpractised in the trace."

Unknowing of the course to Pyle design'd,
A sudden horror seized on either mind;
The prince in rural bower they fondly thought,
Numbering his flocks and herds, not far remote.
"Relate (Antinous cries), devoid of guile,
When spread the prince his sale for distant Pyle?
Did chosen chiefs across the gulfy main
Attend his voyage, or domestic train?
Spontaneous did you speed his secret course,
Or was the vessel seized by fraud or force?"

"With willing duty, not reluctant mind
(Noemon cried), the vessel was resign'd,
Who, in the balance, with the great affairs
Of courts presume to weigh their private cares?
With him, the peerage next in power to you;
And Mentor, captain of the lordly crew,
Or some celestial in his reverend form,
Safe from the secret rock and adverse storm,
Pilot's the course; for when the glimmering ray
Of yester dawn disclosed the tender day,
Mentor himself I saw, and much admired,"
Then ceased the youth, and from the court retired.

Confounded and appall'd, the unfinish'd game
The suitors quit, and all to council came.
Antinous first the assembled peers address'd.
Rage sparkling in his eyes, and burning in his breast

"O shame to manhood! shall one daring boy
The scheme of all our happiness destroy?
Fly unperceived, seducing half the flower
Of nobles, and invite a foreign power?
The ponderous engine raised to crush us all,
Recoiling, on his head is sure to fall.
Instant prepare me, on the neighbouring strand,
With twenty chosen mates a vessel mann'd;
For ambush'd close beneath the Samian shore
His ship returning shall my spies explore;
He soon his rashness shall with life atone,
Seek for his father's fate, but find his own."

With vast applause the sentence all approve;
Then rise, and to the feastful hall remove;
Swift to the queen the herald Medon ran,
Who heard the consult of the dire divan:
Before her dome the royal matron stands,
And thus the message of his haste demands;

"What will the suitors? must my servant-train
The allotted labours of the day refrain,
For them to form some exquisite repast?
Heaven grant this festival may prove their last!
Or, if they still must live, from me remove
The double plague of luxury and love!
Forbear, ye sons of insolence! forbear,
In riot to consume a wretched heir.
In the young soul illustrious thought to raise,
Were ye not tutor'd with Ulysses' praise?
Have not your fathers oft my lord defined,
Gentle of speech, beneficent of mind?
Some kings with arbitrary rage devour,
Or in their tyrant-minions vest the power;
Ulysses let no partial favours fall,
The people's parent, he protected all;
But absent now, perfidious and ingrate!
His stores ye ravage, and usurp his state."

He thus: "O were the woes you speak the worst!
They form a deed more odious and accursed;
More dreadful than your boding soul divines;
But pitying Jove avert the dire designs!
The darling object of your royal care
Is marked to perish in a deathful snare;
Before he anchors in his native port,
From Pyle re-sailing and the Spartan court;
Horrid to speak! in ambush is decreed
The hope and heir of Ithaca to bleed!"

Sudden she sunk beneath the weighty woes,
The vital streams a chilling horror froze;
The big round tear stands trembling in her eye,
And on her tongue imperfect accents die.
At length in tender language interwove
With sighs, she thus expressed her anxious love;
"Why rarely would my son his fate explore,
Ride the wild waves, and quit the safer shore?
Did he with all the greatly wretched, crave
A blank oblivion, and untimely grave?"

"Tis not (replied the sage) to Medon given
To know, if some inhabitant of heaven
In his young breast the daring thought inspired
Or if, alone with filial duty fired,
The winds end waves he tempts in early bloom,
Studious to learn his absent father's doom."

The sage retired: unable to control
The mighty griefs that swell her labouring soul
Rolling convulsive on the floor is seen
The piteous object of a prostrate queen.
Words to her dumb complaint a pause supplies,
And breath, to waste in unavailing cries.
Around their sovereign wept the menial fair,
To whom she thus address'd her deep despair:

"Behold a wretch whom all the gods consign
To woe! Did ever sorrows equal mine?
Long to my joys my dearest lord is lost,
His country's buckler, and the Grecian boast;
Now from my fond embrace, by tempests torn,
Our other column of the state is borne;
Nor took a kind adieu, nor sought consent!--
Unkind confederates in his dire intent!
Ill suits it with your shows of duteous zeal,
From me the purposed voyage to conceal;
Though at the solemn midnight hour he rose,
Why did you fear to trouble my repose?
He either had obey'd my fond desire,
Or seen his mother pierced with grief expire.
Bid Dolius quick attend, the faithful slave
Whom to my nuptial train Icarius gave
To tend the fruit groves: with incessant speed
He shall this violence of death decreed
To good Laertes tell.  Experienced age
May timely intercept the ruffian rage.
Convene the tribes the murderous plot reveal,
And to their power to save his race appeal."

Then Euryclea thus: "My dearest dread;
Though to the sword I bow this hoary head,
Or if a dungeon be the pain decreed,
I own me conscious of the unpleasing deed;
Auxiliar to his flight, my aid implored,
With wine and viands I the vessel stored;
A solemn oath, imposed, the secret seal'd,
Till the twelfth dawn the light of day reveal'd.
Dreading the effect of a fond mother's fear,
He dared not violate your royal ear.
But bathe, and, in imperial robes array'd,
Pay due devotions to the martial maid,
And rest affianced in her guardian aid.
Send not to good Laertes, nor engage
In toils of state the miseries of age:
Tis impious to surmise the powers divine
To ruin doom the Jove-descended line;
Long shall the race of just Arcesius reign,
And isles remote enlarge his old domain."

The queen her speech with calm attention hears,
Her eyes restrain the silver-streaming tears:
She bathes, and robed, the sacred dome ascends;
Her pious speed a female train attends:
The salted cakes in canisters are laid,
And thus the queen invokes Minerva's aid;

"Daughter divine of Jove, whose arm can wield
The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield
If e'er Ulysses to thy fane preferr'd
The best and choicest of his flock and herd;
Hear, goddess, hear, by those oblations won;
And for the pious sire preserve the son;
His wish'd return with happy power befriend,
And on the suitors let thy wrath descend."

She ceased; shrill ecstasies of joy declare
The favouring goddess present to the prayer;
The suitors heard, and deem'd the mirthful voice
A signal of her hymeneal choice;
Whilst one most jovial thus accosts the board:

"Too late the queen selects a second lord;
In evil hour the nuptial rite intends,
When o'er her son disastrous death impends."
Thus he, unskill'd of what the fates provide!
But with severe rebuke Antinous cried:

"These empty vaunts will make the voyage vain:
Alarm not with discourse the menial train:
The great event with silent hope attend,
Our deeds alone our counsel must commend."
His speech thus ended short, he frowning rose,
And twenty chiefs renowned for valour chose;
Down to the strand he speeds with haughty strides,
Where anchor'd in the bay the vessel rides,
Replete with mail and military store,
In all her tackle trim to quit the shore.
The desperate crew ascend, unfurl the sails
(The seaward prow invites the tardy gales);
Then take repast till Hesperus display'd
His golden circlet, in the western shade.

Meantime the queen, without reflection due,
Heart-wounded, to the bed of state withdrew:
In her sad breast the prince's fortunes roll,
And hope and doubt alternate seize her soul.
So when the woodman's toil her cave surrounds,
And with the hunter's cry the grove resounds,
With grief and rage the mother-lion stung.
Fearless herself, yet trembles for her young
While pensive in the silent slumberous shade,
Sleep's gentle powers her drooping eyes invade;
Minerva, life-like, on embodied air
Impress'd the form of Iphthima the fair;
(Icarius' daughter she, whose blooming charms
Allured Eumelus to her virgin arms;
A sceptred lord, who o'er the fruitful plain
Of Thessaly wide stretched his ample reign:)
As Pallas will'd, along the sable skies,
To calm the queen, the phantom sister flies.
Swift on the regal dome, descending right,
The bolted valves are pervious to her flight.
Close to her head the pleasing vision stands,
And thus performs Minerva's high commands

"O why, Penelope, this causeless fear,
To render sleep's soft blessing unsincere?
Alike devote to sorrow's dire extreme
The day-reflection, and the midnight-dream!
Thy son the gods propitious will restore,
And bid thee cease his absence to deplore."

To whom the queen (whilst yet in pensive mind
Was in the silent gates of sleep confined):
"O sister to my soul forever dear,
Why this first visit to reprove my fear?
How in a realm so distant should you know
From what deep source ceaseless sorrows flow?
To all my hope my royal lord is lost,
His country's buckler, and the Grecian boast;
And with consummate woe to weigh me down,
The heir of all his honours and his crown,
My darling son is fled! an easy prey
To the fierce storms, or men more fierce than they;
Who, in a league of blood associates sworn,
Will intercept the unwary youth's return."

"Courage resume (the shadowy form replied);
In the protecting care of Heaven confide;
On him attends the blue eyed martial maid:
What earthly can implore a surer aid?
Me now the guardian goddess deigns to send,
To bid thee patient his return attend."

The queen replies: "If in the blest abodes,
A goddess, thou hast commerce with the gods;
Say, breathes my lord the blissful realm of light,
Or lies he wrapp'd in ever-during night?"

"Inquire not of his doom, (the phantom cries,)
I speak not all the counsel of the skies;
Nor must indulge with vain discourse, or long,
The windy satisfaction of the tongue."

Swift through the valves the visionary fair
Repass'd, and viewless mix'd with common air.
The queen awakes, deliver'd of her woes;
With florid joy her heart dilating glows:
The vision, manifest of future fate,
Makes her with hope her son's arrival wait.

Meantime the suitors plough the watery plain,
Telemachus in thought already slain!
When sight of lessening Ithaca was lost
Their sail directed for the Samian coast
A small but verdant isle appear'd in view,
And Asteris the advancing pilot knew;
An ample port the rocks projected form,
To break the rolling waves and ruffling storm:
That safe recess they gain with happy speed,
And in close ambush wait the murderous deed.

The saffron morn, with early blushes spread,
Now rose refulgent from Tithonus' bed;
With new-born day to gladden mortal sight,
And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light.
Then met the eternal synod of the sky,
Before the god, who thunders from on high,
Supreme in might, sublime in majesty.
Pallas, to these, deplores the unequal fates
Of wise Ulysses and his toils relates:
Her hero's danger touch'd the pitying power,
The nymph's seducements, and the magic bower.
Thus she began her plaint:  "Immortal Jove!
And you who fill the blissful seats above!
Let kings no more with gentle mercy sway,
Or bless a people willing to obey,
But crush the nations with an iron rod,
And every monarch be the scourge of God.
If from your thoughts Ulysses you remove,
Who ruled his subjects with a father's love,
Sole in an isle, encircled by the main,
Abandon'd, banish'd from his native reign,
Unbless'd he sighs, detained by lawless charms,
And press'd unwilling in Calypso's arms.
Nor friends are there, nor vessels to convey,
Nor oars to cut the immeasurable way.
And now fierce traitors, studious to destroy
His only son, their ambush'd fraud employ;
Who, pious, following his great father's fame,
To sacred Pylos and to Sparta came."

"What words are these? (replied the power who forms
The clouds of night, and darkens heaven with storms;)
Is not already in thy soul decreed,
The chief's return shall make the guilty bleed?
What cannot Wisdom do? Thou may'st restore
The son in safety to his native shore;
While the fell foes, who late in ambush lay,
With fraud defeated measure back their way."

Then thus to Hermes the command was given:
"Hermes, thou chosen messenger of heaven!
Go, to the nymph be these our orders borne
'Tis Jove's decree, Ulysses shall return:
The patient man shall view his old abodes,
Nor helped by mortal hand, nor guiding gods
In twice ten days shall fertile Scheria find,
Alone, and floating to the wave and wind.
The bold Phaecians there, whose haughty line
Is mixed with gods, half human, half divine,
The chief shall honour as some heavenly guest,
And swift transport him to his place of rest,
His vessels loaded with a plenteous store
Of brass, of vestures, and resplendent ore
(A richer prize than if his joyful isle
Received him charged with Ilion's noble spoil),
His friends, his country, he shall see, though late:
Such is our sovereign will, and such is fate."

He spoke. The god who mounts the winged winds
Fast to his feet the golden pinions binds,
That high through fields of air his flight sustain
O'er the wide earth, and o'er the boundless main:
He grasps the wand that causes sleep to fly,
Or in soft slumber seals the wakeful eye;
Then shoots from heaven to high Pieria's steep,
And stoops incumbent on the rolling deep.
So watery fowl, that seek their fishy food,
With wings expanded o'er the foaming flood,
Now sailing smooth the level surface sweep,
Now dip their pinions in the briny deep;
Thus o'er the word of waters Hermes flew,
Till now the distant island rose in view:
Then, swift ascending from the azure wave,
he took the path that winded to the cave.
Large was the grot, in which the nymph he found
(The fair-hair'd nymph with every beauty crown'd).
The cave was brighten'd with a rising blaze;
Cedar and frankincense, an odorous pile,
Flamed on the hearth, and wide perfumed the isle;
While she with work and song the time divides,
And through the loom the golden shuttle guides.
Without the grot a various sylvan scene
Appear'd around, and groves of living green;
Poplars and alders ever quivering play'd,
And nodding cypress form'd a fragrant shade:
On whose high branches, waving with the storm,
The birds of broadest wing their mansions form,--
The chough, the sea-mew, the loquacious crow,--
and scream aloft, and skim the deeps below.
Depending vines the shelving cavern screen.
With purple clusters blushing through the green.
Four limped fountains from the clefts distil:
And every fountain pours a several rill,
In mazy windings wandering down the hill:
Where bloomy meads with vivid greens were crown'd,
And glowing violets threw odours round.
A scene, where, if a god should cast his sight,
A god might gaze, and wander with delight!
Joy touch'd the messenger of heaven: he stay'd
Entranced, and all the blissful haunts surveyed.
Him, entering in the cave, Calypso knew;
For powers celestial to each other's view
Stand still confess'd, though distant far they lie
To habitants of earth, or sea, or sky.
But sad Ulysses, by himself apart,
Pour'd the big sorrows of his swelling heard;
All on the lonely shore he sate to weep,
And roll'd his eyes around the restless deep:
Toward his loved coast he roll'd his eyes in vain,
Till, dimm'd with rising grief, they stream'd again.

Now graceful seated on her shining throne,
To Hermes thus the nymph divine begun:

"God of the golden wand! on what behest
Arrivest thou here, an unexpected guest?
Loved as thou art, thy free injunctions lay;
'Tis mine with joy and duty to obey.
Till now a stranger, in a happy hour
Approach, and taste the dainties of my bower."

Thus having spoke, the nymph the table spread
(Ambrosial cates, with nectar rosy-red);
Hermes the hospitable rite partook,
Divine refection! then, recruited, spoke:

"What moves this journey from my native sky,
A goddess asks, nor can a god deny.
Hear then the truth. By mighty Jove's command
Unwilling have I trod this pleasing land:
For who, self-moved, with weary wing would sweep
Such length of ocean and unmeasured deep;
A world of waters! far from all the ways
Where men frequent, or sacred altars blaze!
But to Jove's will submission we must pay;
What power so great to dare to disobey?
A man, he says, a man resides with thee,
Of all his kind most worn with misery.
The Greeks, (whose arms for nine long year employ'd
Their force on Ilion, in the tenth destroy'd,)
At length, embarking in a luckless hour,
With conquest proud, incensed Minerva's power:
Hence on the guilty race her vengeance hurl'd,
With storms pursued them through the liquid world.
There all his vessels sunk beneath the wave!
There all his dear companions found their grave!
Saved from the jaws of death by Heaven's decree,
The tempest drove him to these shores and thee.
Him, Jove now orders to his native lands
Straight to dismiss: so destiny commands:
Impatient Fate his near return attends,
And calls him to his country, and his friends."

E'en to her inmost soul the goddess shook;
Then thus her anguish, and her passion broke:
"Ungracious gods! with spite and envy cursed!
Still to your own ethereal race the worst!
Ye envy mortal and immortal joy,
And love, the only sweet of life destroy,
Did ever goddess by her charms engage
A favour'd mortal, and not feel your rage?
So when Aurora sought Orion's love,
Her joys disturbed your blissful hours above,
Till, in Ortygia Dian's winged dart
Had pierced the hapless hunter to the heart,
So when the covert of the thrice-eared field
Saw stately Ceres to her passion yield,
Scarce could Iasion taste her heavenly charms,
But Jove's swift lightning scorched him in her arms.
And is it now my turn, ye mighty powers!
Am I the envy of your blissful bowers?
A man, an outcast to the storm and wave,
It was my crime to pity, and to save;
When he who thunders rent his bark in twain,
And sunk his brave companions in the main,
Alone, abandon'd, in mid-ocean tossed,
The sport of winds, and driven from every coast,
Hither this man of miseries I led,
Received the friendless, and the hungry fed;
Nay promised (vainly promised) to bestow
Immortal life, exempt from age and woe.
'Tis past-and Jove decrees he shall remove;
Gods as we are, we are but slaves to Jove.
Go then he must (he must, if he ordain,
Try all those dangers, all those deeps, again);
But never, never shall Calypso send
To toils like these her husband and her friend.
What ships have I, what sailors to convey,
What oars to cut the long laborious way?
Yet I'll direct the safest means to go;
That last advice is all I can bestow."

To her the power who hears the charming rod;
"Dismiss the man, nor irritate the god;
Prevent the rage of him who reigns above,
For what so dreadful as the wrath of Jove?"
Thus having said, he cut the cleaving sky,
And in a moment vanished from her eye,
The nymph, obedient to divine command,
To seek Ulysses, paced along the sand,
Him pensive on the lonely beach she found,
With streaming eyes in briny torrents drown'd,
And inly pining for his native shore;
For now the soft enchantress pleased no more;
For now, reluctant, and constrained by charms,
Absent he lay in her desiring arms,
In slumber wore the heavy night away,
On rocks and shores consumed the tedious day;
There sate all desolate, and sighed alone,
With echoing sorrows made the mountains groan.
And roll'd his eyes o'er all the restless main,
Till, dimmed with  rising grief, they streamed again.

Here, on his musing mood the goddess press'd,
Approaching soft, and thus the chief address'd:
"Unhappy man! to wasting woes a prey,
No more in sorrows languish life away:
Free as the winds I give thee now to rove:
Go, fell the timber of yon lofty grove,
And form a raft, and build the rising ship,
Sublime to bear thee o'er the gloomy deep.
To store the vessel let the care be mine,
With water from the rock and rosy wine,
And life-sustaining bread, and fair array,
And prosperous gales to waft thee on the way.
These, if the gods with my desire comply
(The gods, alas, more mighty far than I,
And better skill'd in dark events to come),
In peace shall land thee at thy native home."

With sighs Ulysses heard the words she spoke,
Then thus his melancholy silence broke:
"Some other motive, goddess! sways thy mind
(Some close design, or turn of womankind),
Nor my return the end, nor this the way,
On a slight raft to pass the swelling sea,
Huge, horrid, vast! where scarce in safety sails
The best-built ship, though Jove inspires the gales.
The bold proposal how shall I fulfil,
Dark as I am, unconscious of thy will?
Swear, then, thou mean'st not what my soul forebodes;
Swear by the solemn oath that binds the gods."

Him, while he spoke, with smiles Calypso eyed,
And gently grasp'd his hand, and thus replied:
"This shows thee, friend, by old experience taught,
And learn'd in all the wiles of human thought,
How prone to doubt, how cautious, are the wise!
But hear, O earth, and hear, ye sacred skies!
And thou, O Styx! whose formidable floods
Glide through the shades, and bind the attesting gods!
No form'd design, no meditated end,
Lurks in the counsel of thy faithful friend;
Kind the persuasion, and sincere my aim;
The same my practice, were my fate the same.
Heaven has not cursed me with a heart of steel,
But given the sense to pity, and to feel."

Thus having said, the goddess marched before:
He trod her footsteps in the sandy shore.
At the cool cave arrived, they took their state;
He filled the throne where Mercury had sate.
For him the nymph a rich repast ordains,
Such as the mortal life of man sustains;
Before herself were placed the the cates divine,
Ambrosial banquet and celestial wine.
Their hunger satiate, and their thirst repress'd,
Thus spoke Calypso to her godlike guest:

"Ulysses! (with a sigh she thus began;)
O sprung from gods! in wisdom more than man!
Is then thy home the passion of thy heart?
Thus wilt thou leave me, are we thus to part?
Farewell! and ever joyful mayst thou be,
Nor break the transport with one thought of me.
But ah, Ulysses! wert thou given to know
What Fate yet dooms these still to undergo,
Thy heart might settle in this scene of ease.
And e'en these slighted charms might learn to please.
A willing goddess, and immortal life.
Might banish from thy mind an absent wife.
Am I inferior to a mortal dame?
Less soft my feature less august my frame?
Or shall the daughters of mankind compare
Their earth born beauties with the heavenly fair?"

"Alas! for this (the prudent man replies)
Against Ulysses shall thy anger rise?
Loved and adored, O goddess as thou art,
Forgive the weakness of a human heart.
Though well I see thy graces far above
The dear, though mortal, object of my love,
Of youth eternal well the difference know,
And the short date of fading charms below;
Yet every day, while absent thus I roam,
I languish to return and die at home.
Whate'er the gods shall destine me to bear;
In the black ocean or the watery war,
'Tis mine to master with a constant mind;
Inured to perils, to the worst resign'd,
By seas, by wars, so many dangers run;
Still I can suffer; their high will he done!"

Thus while he spoke, the beamy sun descends,
And rising night her friendly shade extends,
To the close grot the lonely pair remove,
And slept delighted with the gifts of love.
When rose morning call'd them from their rest,
Ulysses robed him in the cloak and vest.
The nymph's fair head a veil transparent graced,
Her swelling loins a radiant zone embraced
With flowers of gold; an under robe, unbound,
In snowy waves flow'd glittering on the ground.
Forth issuing thus, she gave him first to wield
A weighty axe with truest temper steeled,
And double-edged; the handle smooth and plain,
Wrought of the clouded olive's easy grain;
And next, a wedge to drive with sweepy sway
Then to the neighboring forest led the way.
On the lone island's utmost verge there stood
Of poplars, pine, and firs, a lofty wood,
Whose leafless summits to the skies aspire,
Scorch'd by the sun, or seared by heavenly fire
(Already dried).  These pointing out to view,
The nymph just show'd him, and with tears withdrew.

Now toils the hero: trees on trees o'erthrown
Fall crackling round him, and the forests groan:
Sudden, full twenty on the plain are strow'd,
And lopp'd and lighten'd of their branchy load.
At equal angles these disposed to join,
He smooth'd and squared them by the rule and line,
(The wimbles for the work Calypso found)
With those he pierced them and with clinchers bound.
Long and capacious as a shipwright forms
Some bark's broad bottom to out-ride the storms,
So large he built the raft; then ribb'd it strong
From space to space, and nail'd the planks along;
These form'd the sides: the deck he fashion'd last;
Then o'er the vessel raised the taper mast,
With crossing sail-yards dancing in the wind;
And to the helm the guiding rudder join'd
(With yielding osiers fenced, to break the force
Of surging waves, and steer the steady course).
Thy loom, Calypso, for the future sails
Supplied the cloth, capacious of the gales.
With stays and cordage last he rigged the ship,
And, roll'd on levers, launch'd her in the deep.

Four days were pass'd, and now the work complete,
Shone the fifth morn, when from her sacred seat
The nymph dismiss'd him (odorous garments given),
And bathed in fragrant oils that breathed of heaven:
Then fill'd two goatskins with her hands divine,
With water one, and one with sable wine:
Of every kind, provisions heaved aboard;
And the full decks with copious viands stored.
The goddess, last, a gentle breeze supplies,
To curl old Ocean, and to warm the skies.

And now, rejoicing in the prosperous gales,
With beating heart Ulysses spreads his sails;
Placed at the helm he sate, and mark'd the skies,
Nor closed in sleep his ever-watchful eyes.
There view'd the Pleiads, and the Northern Team,
And great Orion's more refulgent beam.
To which, around the axle of the sky,
The Bear, revolving, points his golden eye:
Who shines exalted on the ethereal plain,
Nor bathes his blazing forehead in the main.
Far on the left those radiant fires to keep
The nymph directed, as he sail'd the deep.
Full seventeen nights he cut the foaming way:
The distant land appear'd the following day:
Then swell'd to sight Phaeacia's dusky coast,
And woody mountains, half in vapours lost;
That lay before him indistinct and vast,
Like a broad shield amid the watery waste.

But him, thus voyaging the deeps below,
From far, on Solyme's aerial brow,
The king of ocean saw, and seeing burn'd
(From AEthiopia's happy climes return'd);
The raging monarch shook his azure head,
And thus in secret to his soul he said:
"Heavens! how uncertain are the powers on high!
Is then reversed the sentence of the sky,
In one man's favour; while a distant guest
I shared secure the AEthiopian feast?
Behold how near Phoenecia's land he draws;
The land affix'd by Fate's eternal laws
To end his toils. Is then our anger vain?
No; if this sceptre yet commands the main."

He spoke, and high the forky trident hurl'd,
Rolls clouds on clouds, and stirs the watery world,
At once the face of earth and sea deforms,
Swells all the winds, and rouses all the storms.
Down rushed the night: east, west, together roar;
And south and north roll mountains to the shore.
Then shook the hero, to despair resign'd,
And question'd thus his yet unconquer'd mind;

"Wretch that I am! what farther fates attend
This life of toils, and what my destined end?
Too well, alas! the island goddess knew
On the black sea what perils should ensue.
New horrors now this destined head inclose;
Untill'd is yet the measure of my woes;
With what a cloud the brows of heaven are crown'd;
What raging winds! what roaring waters round!
'Tis Jove himself the swelling tempest rears;
Death, present death, on every side appears.
Happy! thrice happy! who, in battle slain,
Press'd in Atrides' cause the Trojan plain!
Oh! had I died before that well-fought wall!
Had some distinguish'd day renown'd my fall
(Such as was that when showers of javelins fled
From conquering Troy around Achilles dead),
All Greece had paid me solemn funerals then,
And spread my glory with the sons of men.
A shameful fate now hides my hapless head,
Unwept, unnoted, and for ever dead!"

A mighty wave rush'd o'er him as he spoke,
The raft is cover'd, and the mast is broke;
Swept from the deck and from the rudder torn,
Far on the swelling surge the chief was borne;
While by the howling tempest rent in twain
Flew sail and sail-yards rattling o'er the main.
Long-press'd, he heaved beneath the weighty wave,
Clogg'd by the cumbrous vest Calypso gave;
At length, emerging, from his nostrils wide
And gushing mouth effused the briny tide;
E'en then not mindless of his last retreat,
He seized the raft, and leap'd into his seat,
Strong with the fear of death.  In rolling flood,
Now here, now there, impell'd the floating wood
As when a heap of gather'd thorns is cast,
Now to, now fro, before the autumnal blast;
Together clung, it rolls around the field;
So roll'd the float, and so its texture held:
And now the south, and now the north, bear sway,
And now the east the foamy floods obey,
And now the west wind whirls it o'er the sea.
The wandering chief with toils on toils oppress'd,
Leucothea saw, and pity touch'd her breast.
(Herself a mortal once, of Cadmus' strain,
But now an azure sister of the main)
Swift as a sea-mew springing from the flood,
All radiant on the raft the goddess stood;
Then thus address'd him: "Thou whom heaven decrees
To Neptune's wrath, stern tyrant of the seas!
(Unequal contest!) not his rage and power,
Great as he is, such virtue shall devour.
What I suggest, thy wisdom will perform:
Forsake thy float, and leave it to the storm;
Strip off thy garments; Neptune's fury brave
With naked strength, and plunge into the wave.
To reach Phaeacia all thy nerves extend,
There Fate decrees thy miseries shall end.
This heavenly scarf beneath thy bosom bind,
And live; give all thy terrors to the wind.
Soon as thy arms the happy shore shall gain,
Return the gift, and cast it in the main:
Observe my orders, and with heed obey,
Cast it far off, and turn thy eyes away."

With that, her hand the sacred veil bestows,
Then down the deeps she dived from whence she rose;
A moment snatch'd the shining form away,
And all was covered with the curling sea.

Struck with amaze, yet still to doubt inclined,
He stands suspended, and explores his mind:
"What shall I do? unhappy me! who knows
But other gods intend me other woes?
Whoe'er thou art, I shall not blindly join
Thy pleaded reason, but consult with mine:
For scarce in ken appears that distant isle
Thy voice foretells me shall conclude my toil.
Thus then I judge: while yet the planks sustain
The wild waves' fury, here I fix'd remain:
But, when their texture to the tempest yields,
I launch adventurous on the liquid fields,
Join to the help of gods the strength of man,
And take this method, since the best I can."

While thus his thoughts an anxious council hold,
The raging god a watery mountain roll'd;
Like a black sheet the whelming billows spread,
Burst o'er the float, and thunder'd on his head.
Planks, beams, disparted fly; the scatter'd wood
Rolls diverse, and in fragments strews the flood.
So the rude Boreas, o'er the field new-shorn,
Tosses and drives the scatter'd heaps of corn.
And now a single beam the chief bestrides:
There poised a while above the bounding tides,
His limbs discumbers of the clinging vest,
And binds the sacred cincture round his breast:
Then prone an ocean in a moment flung,
Stretch'd wide his eager arms, and shot the seas along.
All naked now, on heaving billows laid,
Stern Neptune eyed him, and contemptuous said:

"Go, learn'd in woes, and other foes essay!
Go, wander helpless on the watery way;
Thus, thus find out the destined shore, and then
(If Jove ordains it) mix with happier men.
Whate'er thy fate, the ills our wrath could raise
Shall last remember'd in thy best of days."

This said, his sea-green steeds divide the foam,
And reach high Aegae and the towery dome.
Now, scarce withdrawn the fierce earth-shaking power,
Jove's daughter Pallas watch'd the favouring hour.
Back to their caves she bade the winds to fly;
And hush'd the blustering brethren of the sky.
The drier blasts alone of Boreas away,
And bear him soft on broken waves away;
With gentle force impelling to that shore,
Where fate has destined he shall toil no more.
And now, two nights, and now two days were pass'd,
Since wide he wander'd on the watery waste;
Heaved on the surge with intermitting breath,
And hourly panting in the arms of death.
The third fair morn now blazed upon the main;
Then glassy smooth lay all the liquid plain;
The winds were hush'd, the billows scarcely curl'd,
And a dead silence still'd the watery world;
When lifted on a ridgy wave he spies
The land at distance, and with sharpen'd eyes.
As pious children joy with vast delight
When a loved sire revives before their sight
(Who, lingering along, has call'd on death in vain,
Fix'd by some demon to his bed of pain,
Till heaven by miracle his life restore);
So joys Ulysses at the appearing shore;
And sees (and labours onward as he sees)
The rising forests, and the tufted trees.
And now, as near approaching as the sound
Of human voice the listening ear may wound,
Amidst the rocks he heard a hollow roar
Of murmuring surges breaking on the shore;
Nor peaceful port was there, nor winding bay,
To shield the vessel from the rolling sea,
But cliffs and shaggy shores, a dreadful sight!
All rough with rocks, with foamy billows white.
Fear seized his slacken'd limbs and beating heart,
As thus he communed with his soul apart;

"Ah me! when, o'er a length of waters toss'd,
These eyes at last behold the unhoped-for coast,
No port receives me from the angry main,
But the loud deeps demand me back again.
Above, sharp rocks forbid access; around
Roar the wild waves; beneath, is sea profound!
No footing sure affords the faithless sand,
To stem too rapid, and too deep to stand.
If here I enter, my efforts are vain,
Dash'd on the cliffs, or heaved into the main;
Or round the island if my course I bend,
Where the ports open, or the shores descend,
Back to the seas the rolling surge may sweep,
And bury all my hopes beneath the deep.
Or some enormous whale the god may send
(For many such an Amphitrite attend);
Too well the turns of mortal chance I know,
And hate relentless of my heavenly foe."
While thus he thought, a monstrous wave upbore
The chief, and dash'd him on the craggy shore;
Torn was his skin, nor had the ribs been whole,
But Instant Pallas enter'd in his soul.
Close to the cliff with both his hands he clung,
And stuck adherent, and suspended hung;
Till the huge surge roll'd off; then backward sweep
The refluent tides, and plunge him in the deep.
As when the polypus, from forth his cave
Torn with full force, reluctant beats the wave,
His ragged claws are stuck with stones and sands;
So the rough rock had shagg'd Ulysses hands,
And now had perish'd, whelm'd beneath the main,
The unhappy man; e'en fate had been in vain;
But all-subduing Pallas lent her power,
And prudence saved him in the needful hour.
Beyond the beating surge his course he bore,
(A wider circle, but in sight of shore),
With longing eyes, observing, to survey
Some smooth ascent, or safe sequester'd bay.
Between the parting rocks at length he spied
A failing stream with gentler waters glide;
Where to the seas the shelving shore declined,
And form'd a bay impervious to the wind.
To this calm port the glad Ulysses press'd,
And hail'd the river, and its god address'd:

"Whoe'er thou art, before whose stream unknown
I bend, a suppliant at thy watery throne,
Hear, azure king! nor let me fly in vain
To thee from Neptune and the raging main
Heaven hears and pities hapless men like me,
For sacred even to gods is misery:
Let then thy waters give the weary rest,
And save a suppliant, and a man distress'd."

He pray'd, and straight the gentle stream subsides,
Detains the rushing current of his tides,
Before the wanderer smooths the watery way,
And soft receives him from the rolling sea.
That moment, fainting as he touch'd the shore,
He dropp'd his sinewy arms: his knees no more
Perform'd their office, or his weight upheld:
His swoln heart heaved; his bloated body swell'd:
From mouth and nose the briny torrent ran;
And lost in lassitude lay all the man,
Deprived of voice, of motion, and of breath;
The soul scarce waking in the arms of death.
Soon as warm life its wonted office found,
The mindful chief Leucothea's scarf unbound;
Observant of her word, he turn'd aside
HIs head, and cast it on the rolling tide.
Behind him far, upon the purple waves,
The waters waft it, and the nymph receives.

Now parting from the stream, Ulysses found
A mossy bank with pliant rushes crown'd;
The bank he press'd, and gently kiss'd the ground;
Where on the flowery herb as soft he lay,
Thus to his soul the sage began to say:

"What will ye next ordain, ye powers on high!
And yet, ah yet, what fates are we to try?
Here by the stream, if I the night out-wear,
Thus spent already, how shall nature bear
The dews descending, and nocturnal air;
Or chilly vapours breathing from the flood
When morning rises?--If I take the wood,
And in thick shelter of innumerous boughs
Enjoy the comfort gentle sleep allows;
Though fenced from cold, and though my toil be pass'd,
What savage beasts may wander in the waste?
Perhaps I yet may fall a bloody prey
To prowling bears, or lions in the way."

Thus long debating in himself he stood:
At length he took the passage to the wood,
Whose shady horrors on a rising brow
Waved high, and frown'd upon the stream below.
There grew two olives, closest of the grove,
With roots entwined, the branches interwove;
Alike their leaves, but not alike they smiled
With sister-fruits; one fertile, one was wild.
Nor here the sun's meridian rays had power,
Nor wind sharp-piercing, nor the rushing shower;
The verdant arch so close its texture kept:
Beneath this covert great Ulysses crept.
Of gather'd leaves an ample bed he made
(Thick strewn by tempest through the bowery shade);
Where three at least might winter's cold defy,
Though Boreas raged along the inclement sky.
This store with joy the patient hero found,
And, sunk amidst them, heap'd the leaves around.
As some poor peasant, fated to reside
Remote from neighbours in a forest wide,
Studious to save what human wants require,
In embers heap'd, preserves the seeds of fire:
Hid in dry foliage thus Ulysses lies,
Till Pallas pour'd soft slumbers on his eyes;
And golden dreams (the gift of sweet repose)
Lull'd all his cares, and banish'd all his woes.

While thus the weary wanderer sunk to rest,
And peaceful slumbers calmed his anxious breast,
The martial maid from heavens aerial height
Swift to Phaeacia wing'd her rapid flight,
In elder times the soft Phaeacian train
In ease possess'd the wide Hyperian plain;
Till the Cyclopean race in arms arose
A lawless nation of gigantic foes;
Then great Nausithous from Hyperia far,
Through seas retreating from the sounds of war,
The recreant nation to fair Scheria led,
Where never science rear'd her laurell'd head;
There round his tribes a strength of wall he raised;
To heaven the glittering domes and temples blazed;
Just to his realms, he parted grounds from grounds,
And shared the lands, and gave the lands their bounds.
Now in the silent grave the monarch lay,
And wise Alcinous held the legal sway.

To his high palace through the fields of air
The goddess shot; Ulysses was her care.
There, as the night in silence roll'd away,
A heaven of charms divine Nausicaa lay:
Through the thick gloom the shining portals blaze;
Two nymphs the portals guard, each nymph a Grace,
Light as the viewless air the warrior maid
Glides through the valves, and hovers round her head;
A favourite virgin's blooming form she took,
From Dymas sprung, and thus the vision spoke:

"Oh Indolent! to waste thy hours away!
And sleep'st thou careless of the bridal day!
Thy spousal ornament neglected lies;
Arise, prepare the bridal train, arise!
A just applause the cares of dress impart,
And give soft transport to a parent's heart.
Haste, to the limpid stream direct thy way,
When the gay morn unveils her smiling ray;
Haste to the stream! companion of thy care,
Lo, I thy steps attend, thy labours share.
Virgin, awake! the marriage hour is nigh,
See from their thrones thy kindred monarchs sigh!
The royal car at early dawn obtain,
And order mules obedient to the rein;
For rough the way, and distant rolls the wave,
Where their fair vests Phaeacian virgins lave,
In pomp ride forth; for pomp becomes the great
And majesty derives a grace from state."
Then to the palaces of heaven she sails,
Incumbent on the wings of wafting gales;
The seat of gods; the regions mild of peace,
Full joy, and calm eternity of ease.
There no rude winds presume to shake the skies,
No rains descend, no snowy vapours rise;
But on immortal thrones the blest repose;
The firmament with living splendours glows.
Hither the goddess winged the aerial way,
Through heaven's eternal gates that blazed with day.

Now from her rosy car Aurora shed
The dawn, and all the orient flamed with red.
Up rose the virgin with the morning light,
Obedient to the vision of the night.
The queen she sought, the queen her hours bestowed
In curious works; the whirling spindle glow'd
With crimson threads, while busy damsels call
The snowy fleece, or twist the purpled wool.
Meanwhile Phaeacia's peers in council sate;
From his high dome the king descends in state;
Then with a filial awe the royal maid
Approach'd him passing, and submissive said:

"Will my dread sire his ear regardful deign,
And may his child the royal car obtain?
Say, with my garments shall I bend my way?
Where through the vales the mazy waters stray?
A dignity of dress adorns the great,
And kings draw lustre from the robe of state.
Five sons thou hast; three wait the bridal day.
And spotless robes become the young and gay;
So when with praise amid the dance they shine,
By these my cares adorn'd that praise is mine."

Thus she: but blushes ill-restrain'd betray
Her thoughts intentive on the bridal day,
The conscious sire the dawning blush survey'd,
And, smiling, thus bespoke the blooming maid
"My child, my darling joy, the car receive;
That, and whate'er our daughter asks, we give."
Swift at the royal nod the attending train
The car prepare, the mules incessant rein,
The blooming virgin with despatchful cares
Tunics, and stoles, and robes imperial, bears.
The queen, assiduous to her train assigns
The sumptuous viands, and the flavorous wines.
The train prepare a cruse of curious mould,
A cruse of fragrance, form'd of burnish'd gold;
Odour divine! whose soft refreshing streams
Sleek the smooth skin, and scent the snowy limbs.

Now mounting the gay seat, the silken reins
Shine in her hand; along the sounding plains
Swift fly the mules; nor rode the nymph alone;
Around, a bevy of bright damsels shone.
They seek the cisterns where Phaeacian dames
Wash their fair garments in the limpid streams;
Where, gathering into depth from falling rills,
The lucid wave a spacious bason fills.
The mules, unharness'd, range beside the main,
Or crop the verdant herbage of the plain.

Then emulous the royal robes they lave,
And plunge the vestures in the cleansing wave
(The vestures cleansed o'erspread the shelly sand,
Their snowy lustre whitens all the strand);
Then with a short repast relieve their toil,
And o'er their limbs diffuse ambrosial oil;
And while the robes imbibe the solar ray,
O'er the green mead the sporting virgins play
(Their shining veils unbound). Along the skies,
Toss'd and retoss'd, the ball incessant flies.
They sport, they feast; Nausicaa lifts her voice,
And, warbling sweet, makes earth and heaven rejoice.

As when o'er Erymanth Diana roves,
Or wide Tuygetus' resounding groves;
A sylvan train the huntress queen surrounds,
Her rattling quiver from her shoulders sounds:
Fierce in the sport, along the mountain's brow
They bay the boar, or chase the bounding roe;
High o'er the lawn, with more majestic pace,
Above the nymphs she treads with stately grace;
Distinguish'd excellence the goddess proves;
Exults Latona as the virgin moves.
With equal grace Nausicaa trod the plain,
And shone transcendent o'er the beauteous train.

Meantime (the care and favourite of the skies
Wrapp'd in imbowering shade, Ulysses lies,
His woes forgot! but Pallas now address'd
To break the bands of all-composing rest.
Forth from her snowy hand Nausicaa threw
The various ball; the ball erroneous flew
And swam the stream; loud shrieks the virgin train,
And the loud shriek redoubles from the main.
Waked by the shrilling sound, Ulysses rose,
And, to the deaf woods wailing, breathed his woes:

"Ah me! on what inhospitable coast,
On what new region is Ulysses toss'd;
Possess'd by wild barbarians fierce in arms;
Or men, whose bosom tender pity warms?
What sounds are these that gather from he shores?
The voice of nymphs that haunt the sylvan bowers,
The fair-hair'd Dryads of the shady wood;
Or azure daughters of the silver flood;
Or human voice? but issuing from the shades,
Why cease I straight to learn what sound invades?"

Then, where the grove with leaves umbrageous bends,
With forceful strength a branch the hero rends;
Around his loins the verdant cincture spreads
A wreathy foliage and concealing shades.
As when a lion in the midnight hours,
Beat by rude blasts, and wet with wintry showers,
Descends terrific from the mountains brow;
With living flames his rolling eye balls glow;
With conscious strength elate, he bends his way,
Majestically fierce, to seize his prey
(The steer or stag;) or, with keen hunger bold,
Spring o'er the fence and dissipates the fold.
No less a terror, from the neighbouring groves
(Rough from the tossing surge) Ulysses moves;
Urged on by want, and recent from the storms;
The brackish ooze his manly grace deforms.
Wide o'er the shore with many a piercing cry
To rocks, to caves, the frightened virgins fly;
All but the nymph; the nymph stood fix'd alone,
By Pallas arm'd with boldness not her own.
Meantime in dubious thought the king awaits,
And, self-considering, as he stands, debates;
Distant his mournful story to declare,
Or prostrate at her knee address the prayer.
But fearful to offend, by wisdom sway'd,
At awful distance he accosts the maid:

"If from the skies a goddess, or if earth
(Imperial virgin) boast thy glorious birth,
To thee I bend! If in that bright disguise
Thou visit earth, a daughter of the skies,
Hail, Dian, hail! the huntress of the groves
So shines majestic, and so stately moves,
So breathes an air divine! But if thy race
Be mortal, and this earth thy native place,
Blest is the father from whose loins you sprung,
Blest is the mother at whose breast you hung.
Blest are the brethren who thy blood divide,
To such a miracle of charms allied:
Joyful they see applauding princes gaze,
When stately in the dance you swim the harmonious maze.
But blest o'er all, the youth with heavenly charms,
Who clasps the bright perfection in his arms!
Never, I never view'd till this blast hour
Such finish'd grace! I gaze, and I adore!
Thus seems the palm with stately honours crown'd
By Phoebus' altars; thus o'erlooks the ground;
The pride of Delos. (By the Delian coast,
I voyaged, leader of a warrior-host,
But ah, how changed I from thence my sorrow flows;
O fatal voyage, source of all my woes;)
Raptured I stood, and as this hour amazed,
With reverence at the lofty wonder gazed:
Raptured I stand! for earth ne'er knew to bear
A plant so stately, or a nymph so fair.
Awed from access, I lift my suppliant hands;
For Misery, O queen! before thee stands.
Twice ten tempestuous nights I roll'd, resign'd
To roaring blows, and the warring wind;
Heaven bade the deep to spare; but heaven, my foe,
Spares only to inflict some mightier woe.
Inured to cares, to death in all its forms;
Outcast I rove, familiar with the storms.
Once more I view the face of human kind:
Oh let soft pity touch thy generous mind!
Unconscious of what air I breathe, I stand
Naked, defenceless on a narrow land.
Propitious to my wants a vest supply
To guard the wretched from the inclement sky:
So may the gods, who heaven and earth control,
Crown the chaste wishes of thy virtuous soul,
On thy soft hours their choicest blessings shed;
Blest with a husband be thy bridal bed;
Blest be thy husband with a blooming race,
And lasting union crown your blissful days.
The gods, when they supremely bless, bestow
Firm union on their favourites below;
Then envy grieves, with inly-pining hate;
The good exult, and heaven is in our state."

To whom the nymph: "O stranger, cease thy care;
Wise is thy soul, but man is bore to bear;
Jove weighs affairs of earth in dubious scales,
And the good suffers, while the bad prevails.
Bear, with a soul resign'd, the will of Jove;
Who breathes, must mourn: thy woes are from above.
But since thou tread'st our hospitable shore,
'Tis mine to bid the wretched grieve no more,
To clothe the naked, and thy way to guide.
Know, the Phaecian tribes this land divide;
From great Alcinous' royal loins I spring,
A happy nation, and a happy king."

Then to her maids: "Why, why, ye coward train,
These fears, this flight? ye fear, and fly in vain.
Dread ye a foe? dismiss that idle dread,
'Tis death with hostile step these shores to tread;
Safe in the love of heaven, an ocean flows
Around our realm, a barrier from the foes;
'Tis ours this son of sorrow to relieve,
Cheer the sad heart, nor let affliction grieve.
By Jove the stranger and the poor are sent;
And what to those we give to Jove is lent.
Then food supply, and bathe his fainting limbs
Where waving shades obscure the mazy streams."

Obedient to the call, the chief they guide
To the calm current of the secret tide;
Close by the stream a royal dress they lay,
A vest and robe, with rich embroidery gay;
Then unguents in a vase of gold supply,
That breathed a fragrance through the balmy sky.

To them the king: "No longer I detain
Your friendly care: retire, ye virgin train!
Retire, while from my wearied limbs I lave
The foul pollution of the briny wave.
Ye gods! since this worn frame refection know,
What scenes have I surveyed of dreadful view!
But, nymphs, recede! sage chastity denies
To raise the blush, or pain the modest eyes."

The nymphs withdrawn, at once into the tide
Active he bounds; the flashing waves divide
O'er all his limbs his hands the waves diffuse,
And from his locks compress the weedy ooze;
The balmy oil, a fragrant shower, be sheds;
Then, dressed, in pomp magnificently treads.
The warrior-goddess gives his frame to shine
With majesty enlarged, and air divine:
Back from his brows a length of hair unfurls,
His hyacinthine locks descend in wavy curls.
As by some artist, to whom Vulcan gives
His skill divine, a breathing statue lives;
By Pallas taught, he frames the wondrous mould,
And o'er the silver pours the fusile gold
So Pallas his heroic frame improves
With heavenly bloom, and like a god he moves.
A fragrance breathes around; majestic grace
Attends his steps: the astonished virgins gaze.
Soft he reclines along the murmuring seas,
Inhaling freshness from the fanning breeze.

The wondering nymph his glorious port survey'd,
And to her damsels, with amazement, said:

"Not without care divine the stranger treads
This land of joy; his steps some godhead leads:
Would Jove destroy him, sure he had been driven
Far from this realm, the favourite isle of heaven.
Late, a sad spectacle of woe, he trod
The desert sands, and now be looks a god.
Oh heaven! in my connubial hour decree
This man my spouse, or such a spouse as he!
But haste, the viands and the bowl provide."
The maids the viands and the bowl supplied:
Eager he fed, for keen his hunger raged,
And with the generous vintage thirst assuaged.

Now on return her care Nausicaa bends,
The robes resumes, the glittering car ascends,
Far blooming o'er the field; and as she press'd
The splendid seat, the listening chief address'd:

"Stranger, arise! the sun rolls down the day.
Lo, to the palace I direct thy way;
Where, in high state, the nobles of the land
Attend my royal sire, a radiant band
But hear, though wisdom in thy soul presides,
Speaks from thy tongue, and every action guides;
Advance at distance, while I pass the plain
Where o'er the furrows waves the golden grain;
Alone I reascend--With airy mounds
A strength of wall the guarded city bounds;
The jutting land two ample bays divides:
Full through the narrow mouths descend the tides;
The spacious basons arching rocks enclose,
A sure defence from every storm that blows.
Close to the bay great Neptune's fane adjoins;
And near, a forum flank'd with marble shines,
Where the bold youth, the numerous fleets to store,
Shape the broad sail, or smooth the taper oar:
For not the bow they bend, nor boast the skill
To give the feather'd arrow wings to kill;
But the tall mast above the vessel rear,
Or teach the fluttering sail to float in air.
They rush into the deep with eager joy,
Climb the steep surge, and through the tempest fly;
A proud, unpolish'd race--To me belongs
The care to shun the blast of slanderous tongues;
Lest malice, prone the virtuous to defame,
Thus with wild censure taint my spotless name:
'What stranger this whom thus Nausicaa leads!
Heavens, with what graceful majesty he treads!
Perhaps a native of some distant shore,
The future consort of her bridal hour:
Or rather some descendant of the skies;
Won by her prayer, the aerial bridegroom flies,
Heaven on that hour its choicest influence shed,
That gave a foreign spouse to crown her bed!
All, all the godlike worthies that adorn
This realm, she flies: Phaeacia is her scorn.'
And just the blame: for female innocence
Not only flies the guilt, but shuns the offence:
The unguarded virgin, as unchaste, I blame;
And the least freedom with the sex is shame,
Till our consenting sires a spouse provide,
And public nuptials justify the bride,
But would'st thou soon review thy native plain?
Attend, and speedy thou shalt pass the main:
Nigh where a grove with verdant poplars crown'd,
To Pallas sacred, shades the holy ground,
We bend our way; a bubbling fount distills
A lucid lake, and thence descends in rills;
Around the grove, a mead with lively green
Falls by degrees, and forms a beauteous scene;
Here a rich juice the royal vineyard pours;
And there the garden yields a waste of flowers.
Hence lies the town, as far as to the ear
Floats a strong shout along the waves of air.
There wait embower'd, while I ascend alone
To great Alcinous on his royal throne.
Arrived, advance, impatient of delay,
And to the lofty palace bend thy way:
The lofty palace overlooks the town,
From every dome by pomp superior known;
A child may point the way. With earnest gait
Seek thou the queen along the rooms of state;
Her royal hand a wondrous work designs,
Around a circle of bright damsels shines;
Part twist the threads, and part the wool dispose,
While with the purple orb the spindle glows.
High on a throne, amid the Scherian powers,
My royal father shares the genial hours:
But to the queen thy mournful tale disclose,
With the prevailing eloquence of woes:
So shalt thou view with joy thy natal shore,
Though mountains rise between and oceans roar."

She added not, but waving, as she wheel'd,
The silver scourge, it glitter'd o'er the field;
With skill the virgin guides the embroider'd rein,
Slow rolls the car before the attending train,
Now whirling down the heavens, the golden day
Shot through the western clouds a dewy ray;
The grove they reach, where, from the sacred shade,
To Pallas thus the pensive hero pray'd:

"Daughter of Jove! whose arms in thunder wield
The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield;
Forsook by thee, in vain I sought thy aid
When booming billows closed above my bead;
Attend, unconquer'd maid! accord my vows,
Bid the Great hear, and pitying, heal my woes."

This heard Minerva, but forbore to fly
(By Neptune awed) apparent from the sky;
Stern god! who raged with vengeance, unrestrain'd.
Till great Ulysses hail'd his native land.

The patient heavenly man thus suppliant pray'd;
While the slow mules draws on the imperial maid;
Through the proud street she moves, the public gaze;
The turning wheel before the palace stays.
With ready love her brothers, gathering round,
Received the vestures, and the mules unbound.
She seeks the bridal bower: a matron there
The rising fire supplies with busy care,
Whose charms in youth her father's heart inflamed,
Now worn with age, Eurymedusa named;
The captive dame Phaeacian rovers bore,
Snatch'd from Epirus, her sweet native shore
(A grateful prize), and in her bloom bestow'd
On good Alcinous, honor'd as a god;
Nurse of Nausicaa from her infant years,
And tender second to a mother's cares.

Now from the sacred thicket where he lay,
To town Ulysses took the winding way.
Propitious Pallas, to secure her care,
Around him spread a veil of thicken'd air;
To shun the encounter of the vulgar crowd,
Insulting still, inquisitive and loud.
When near the famed Phaeacian walls he drew,
The beauteous city opening to his view,
His step a virgin met, and stood before:
A polish'd urn the seeming virgin bore,
And youthful smiled; but in the low disguise
Lay hid the goddess with the azure eyes.

"Show me, fair daughter (thus the chief demands),
The house of him who rules these happy lands
Through many woes and wanderings, do I come
To good Alcinous' hospitable dome.
Far from my native coast, I rove alone,
A wretched stranger, and of all unknown!"

The goddess answer'd: "Father, I obey,
And point the wandering traveller his way:
Well known to me the palace you inquire,
For fast beside it dwells my honour'd sire:
But silent march, nor greet the common train
With question needless, or inquiry vain;
A race of ragged mariners are these,
Unpolish'd men, and boisterous as their seas
The native islanders alone their care,
And hateful he who breathes a foreign air.
These did the ruler of the deep ordain
To build proud navies, and command the main;
On canvas wings to cut the watery way;
No bird so light, no thought so swift as they."

Thus having spoke, the unknown celestial leads:
The footsteps of the duty he treads,
And secret moves along the crowded space,
Unseen of all the rude Phaeacian race.
(So Pallas order'd, Pallas to their eyes
The mist objected, and condensed the skies.)
The chief with wonder sees the extended streets,
The spreading harbours, and the riding fleets;
He next their princes' lofty domes admires,
In separate islands, crown'd with rising spires;
And deep entrenchments, and high walls of stone.
That gird the city like a marble zone.
At length the kingly palace-gates he view'd;
There stopp'd the goddess, and her speech renew'd;

"My task is done: the mansion you inquire
Appears before you: enter, and admire.
High-throned, and feasting, there thou shalt behold
The sceptred rulers. Fear not, but be bold:
A decent boldness ever meets with friends,
Succeeds, and even a stranger recommends
First to the queen prefer a suppliant's claim,
Alcinous' queen, Arete is her name.
The same her parents, and her power the same.
For know, from ocean's god Nausithous sprung,
And Peribaea, beautiful and young
(Eurymedon's last hope, who ruled of old
The race of giants, impious, proud, and bold:
Perish'd the nation in unrighteous war,
Perish'd the prince, and left this only heir),
Who now, by Neptune's amorous power compress'd,
Produced a monarch that his people bless'd,
Father and prince of the Phaeacian name;
From him Rhexenor and Alcinous came.
The first by Phoebus' hurtling arrows fired,
New from his nuptials, hapless youth! expired.
No son survived; Arete heir'd his state,
And her, Alcinous chose his royal mate.
With honours yet to womankind unknown.
This queen he graces, and divides the throne;
In equal tenderness her sons conspire,
And all the children emulate their sire.
When through the streets she gracious deigns to move
(The public wonder and the public love),
The tongues of all with transport sound her praise,
The eyes of all, as on a goddess, gaze.
She feels the triumph of a generous breast;
To heal divisions, to relieve the oppress'd;
In virtue rich; in blessing others, bless'd.
(to then secure, thy humble suit prefer
And owe thy country and thy friends to her."

With that the goddess deign'd no longer stay,
But o'er the world of waters wing'd her way;
Forsaking Scheria's ever-pleasing shore,
The winds to Marathon the virgin bore:
Thence, where proud Athens rears her towery head,
With opening streets and shining structures spread,
She pass'd, delighted with the well-known seats;
And to Erectheus' sacred dome retreats.

Meanwhile Ulysses at the palace waits,
There stops, and anxious with his soul debates,
Fix'd in amaze before the royal gates.
The front appear'd with radiant splendours gay,
Bright as the lamp of night, or orb of day,
The walls were massy brass: the cornice high
Blue metals crown'd in colours of the sky,
Rich plates of gold the folding doors incase;
The pillars silver, on a brazen base;
Silver the lintels deep-projecting o'er,
And gold the ringlets that command the door.
Two rows of stately dogs, on either hand,
In sculptured gold and labour'd silver stood
These Vulcan form'd with art divine, to wait
Immortal guardians at Alcinous' gate;
Alive each animated frame appears,
And still to live beyond the power of years,
Fair thrones within from space to space were raised,
Where various carpets with embroidery blessed,
The work of matrons: these the princes press'd.
Day following day, a long-continued feast,
Refulgent pedestals the walls surround,
Which boys of gold with illuming torches crown'd;
The polish'd oar, reflecting every ray,
Blazed on the banquets with a double day.
Full fifty handmaids form the household train;
Some turn the mill, or sift the golden grain;
Some ply the loom; their busy fingers move
Like poplar-leaves when Zephyr fans the grove.
Not more renown'd the men of Scheria's isle
For sailing arts and all the naval toil,
Than works of female skill their women's pride,
The flying shuttle through the threads to guide:
Pallas to these her double gifts imparts,
Incentive genius, and industrious arts.

Close to the gates a spacious garden lies,
From storms defended and inclement skies.
Four acres was the allotted space of ground,
Fenced with a green enclosure all around.
Tall thriving trees confess'd the fruitful mould:
The reddening apple ripens here to gold.
Here the blue fig with luscious juice o'erflows,
With deeper red the full pomegranate glows;
The branch here bends beneath the weighty pear,
And verdant olives flourish round the year,
The balmy spirit of the western gale
Eternal breathes on fruits, unthought to fail:
Each dropping pear a following pear supplies,
On apples apples, figs on figs arise:
The same mild season gives the blooms to blow,
The buds to harden, and the fruits to grow.

Here order'd vines in equal ranks appear,
With all the united labours of the year;
Some to unload the fertile branches run,
Some dry the blackening clusters in the sun,
Others to tread the liquid harvest join:
The groaning presses foam with floods of wine
Here are the vines in early flower descried,
Here grapes discolour'd on the sunnyside,
And there in autumn's richest purple dyed,

Beds of all various herbs, for ever green,
In beauteous order terminate the scene.

Two plenteous fountains the whole prospect crown'd
This through the gardens leads its streams around
Visits each plant, and waters all the ground;
While that in pipes beneath the palace flows,
And thence its current on the town bestows:
To various use their various streams they bring,
The people one, and one supplies the king.

Such were the glories which the gods ordain'd,
To grace Alcinous, and his happy land.
E'en from the chief whom men and nations knew,
The unwonted scene surprise and rapture drew;
In pleasing thought he ran the prospect o'er,
Then hasty enter'd at the lofty door.
Night now approaching, in the palace stand,
With goblets crown'd, the rulers of the land;
Prepared for rest, and offering to the god
Who bears the virtue of the sleepy rod,
Unseen he glided through the joyous crowd,
With darkness circled, and an ambient cloud.
Direct to great Alcinous' throne he came,
And prostrate fell before the imperial dame.
Then from around him dropp'd the veil of night;
Sudden he shines, and manifest to sight.
The nobles gaze, with awful fear oppress'd;
Silent they gaze, and eye the godlike guest.

"Daughter of great Rhexenor! (thus began,
Low at her knees, the much-enduring man)
To thee, thy consort, and this royal train,
To all that share the blessings of your reign,
A suppliant bends: oh pity human woe!
'Tis what the happy to the unhappy owe.
A wretched exile to his country send,
Long worn with griefs, and long without a friend
So may the gods your better days increase,
And all your joys descend on all your race;
So reign for ever on your country's breast,
Your people blessing, by your people bless'd!"

Then to the genial hearth he bow'd his face,
And humbled in the ashes took his place.
Silence ensued.  The eldest first began,
Echeneus sage, a venerable man!
Whose well-taught mind the present age surpass'd,
And join'd to that the experience of the last.
Fit words attended on his weighty sense,
And mild persuasion flow'd in eloquence.

"Oh sight (he cried) dishonest and unjust!
A guest, a stranger, seated in the dust!
To raise the lowly suppliant from the ground
Befits a monarch. Lo! the peers around
But wait thy word, the gentle guest to grace,
And seat him fair in some distinguish'd place.
Let first the herald due libation pay
To Jove, who guides the wanderer on his way:
Then set the genial banquet in his view,
And give the stranger-guest a stranger's due."

His sage advice the listening king obeys,
He stretch'd his hand the prudent chief to raise,
And from his seat Laodamas removed
(The monarch's offspring, and his best-beloved);
There next his side the godlike hero sate;
With stars of silver shone the bed of state.
The golden ewer a beauteous handmaid brings,
Replenish'd from the cool translucent springs,
Whose polish'd vase with copious streams supplies
A silver layer of capacious size.
The table next in regal order spread,
The glittering canisters are heap'd with bread:
Viands of various kinds invite the taste,
Of choicest sort and savour, rich repast!
Thus feasting high, Alcinous gave the sign,
And bade the herald pour the rosy wine;
"Let all around the due libation pay
To Jove, who guides the wanderer on his way."

He said. Pontonous heard the king's command;
The circling goblet moves from hand to hand;
Each drinks the juice that glads the heart of man.
Alcinous then, with aspect mild, began:

"Princes and peers, attend; while we impart
To you the thoughts of no inhuman heart.
Now pleased and satiate from the social rite
Repair we to the blessings of the night;
But with the rising day, assembled here,
Let all the elders of the land appear,
Pious observe our hospitable laws,
And Heaven propitiate in the stranger's cause;
Then join'd in council, proper means explore
Safe to transport him to the wished-for shore
(How distant that, imports us not to know,
Nor weigh the labour, but relieve the woe).
Meantime, nor harm nor anguish let him bear
This interval, Heaven trusts him to our care
But to his native land our charge resign'd,
Heaven's is his life to come, and all the woes behind.
Then must he suffer what the Fates ordain;
For Fate has wove the thread of life with pain?
And twins, e'en from the birth, are Misery and Man!
But if, descended from the Olympian bower,
Gracious approach us some immortal power;
If in that form thou comest a guest divine:
Some high event the conscious gods design.
As yet, unbid they never graced our feast,
The solemn sacrifice call'd down the guest;
Then manifest of Heaven the vision stood,
And to our eyes familiar was the god.
Oft with some favour'd traveller they stray,
And shine before him all the desert way;
With social intercourse, and face to face,
The friends and guardians of our pious race.
So near approach we their celestial kind,
By justice, truth, and probity of mind;
As our dire neighbours of Cyclopean birth
Match in fierce wrong the giant-sons of earth."

"Let no such thought (with modest grace rejoin'd
The prudent Greek) possess the royal mind.
Alas! a mortal, like thyself, am I;
No glorious native of yon azure sky:
In form, ah how unlike their heavenly kind!
How more inferior in the gifts of mind!
Alas, a mortal! most oppress'd of those
Whom Fate has loaded with a weight of woes;
By a sad train of Miseries alone
Distinguish'd long, and second now to none!
By Heaven's high will compell'd from shore to shore;
With Heaven's high will prepared to suffer more.
What histories of toil could I declare!
But still long-wearied nature wants repair;
Spent with fatigue, and shrunk with pining fast,
My craving bowels still require repast.
Howe'er the noble, suffering mind may grieve
Its load of anguish, and disdain to live,
Necessity demands our daily bread;
Hunger is insolent, and will be fed.
But finish, oh ye peers! what you propose,
And let the morrow's dawn conclude my woes.
Pleased will I suffer all the gods ordain,
To see my soil, my son, my friends again.
That view vouchsafed, let instant death surprise
With ever-during shade these happy eyes!"

The assembled peers with general praise approved
His pleaded reason, and the suit he moved.
Each drinks a full oblivion of his cares,
And to the gifts of balmy sleep repairs,
Ulysses in the regal walls alone
Remain'd: beside him, on a splendid throne,
Divine Arete and Alcinous shone.
The queen, an nearer view, the guest survey'd,
Rob'd in the garments her own hands had made,
Not without wonder seen. Then thus began,
Her words addressing to the godlike man:

"Camest thou hither, wondrous stranger I say,
From lands remote and o'er a length of sea?
Tell, then, whence art thou? whence, that princely air?
And robes like these, so recent and so fair?"

"Hard is the task, O princess! you impose
(Thus sighing spoke the man of many woes),
The long, the mournful series to relate
Of all my sorrows sent by Heaven and Fate!
Yet what you ask, attend.  An island lies
Beyond these tracts, and under other skies,
Ogygia named, in Ocean's watery arms;
Where dwells Calypso, dreadful in her charms!
Remote from gods or men she holds her reign,
Amid the terrors of a rolling main.
Me, only me, the hand of fortune bore,
Unblest! to tread that interdicted shore:
When Jove tremendous in the sable deeps
Launch'd his red lightning at our scattered ships;
Then, all my fleet and all my followers lost.
Sole on a plank on boiling surges toss'd,
Heaven drove my wreck the Ogygian Isle to find,
Full nine days floating to the wave and wind.
Met by the goddess there with open arms,
She bribed my stay with more than human charms;
Nay, promised, vainly promised, to bestow
Immortal life, exempt from age and woe;
But all her blandishments successless prove,
To banish from my breast my country's love.
I stay reluctant seven continued years,
And water her ambrosial couch with tears,
The eighth she voluntary moves to part,
Or urged by Jove, or her own changeful heart.
A raft was formed to cross the surging sea;
Herself supplied the stores and rich array,
And gave the gales to waft me on my way,
In seventeen days appear'd your pleasing coast,
And woody mountains half in vapours lost.
Joy touched my soul; my soul was joy'd in vain,
For angry Neptune roused the raging main;
The wild winds whistle, and the billows roar;
The splitting raft the furious tempest tore;
And storms vindictive intercept the shore.
Soon as their rage subsides, the seas I brave
With naked force, and shoot along the wave,
To reach this isle; but there my hopes were lost,
The surge impell'd me on a craggy coast.
I chose the safer sea, and chanced to find
A river's mouth impervious to the wind,
And clear of rocks. I fainted by the flood;
Then took the shelter of the neighbouring wood.
'Twas night, and, covered in the foliage deep,
Jove plunged my senses in the death of sleep.
All night I slept, oblivious of my pain:
Aurora dawned and Phoebus shined in vain,
Nor, till oblique he sloped his evening ray,
Had Somnus dried the balmy dews away.
Then female voices from the shore I heard:
A maid amidst them, goddess-like appear'd;
To her I sued, she pitied my distress;
Like thee in beauty, nor in virtue less.
Who from such youth could hope considerate care?
In youth and beauty wisdom is but rare!
She gave me life, relieved with just supplies
My wants, and lent these robes that strike your eyes.
This is the truth: and oh, ye powers on high!
Forbid that want should sink me to a lie."

To this the king: "Our daughter but express'd
Her cares imperfect to our godlike guest.
Suppliant to her, since first he chose to pray,
Why not herself did she conduct the way,
And with her handmaids to our court convey?"

"Hero and king (Ulysses thus replied)
Nor blame her faultless nor suspect of pride:
She bade me follow in the attendant train;
But fear and reverence did my steps detain,
Lest rash suspicion might alarm thy mind:
Man's of a jealous and mistaken kind."

"Far from my soul (he cried) the gods efface
All wrath ill-grounded, and suspicion base!
Whate'er is honest, stranger, I approve,
And would to Phoebus, Pallas, and to Jove,
Such as thou art, thy thought and mine were one,
Nor thou unwilling to be called my son.
In such alliance couldst thou wish to join,
A palace stored with treasures should be thine.
But if reluctant, who shall force thy stay?
Jove bids to set the stranger on his way,
And ships shall wait thee with the morning ray.
Till then, let slumber cross thy careful eyes:
The wakeful mariners shall watch the skies,
And seize the moment when the breezes rise:
Then gently waft thee to the pleasing shore,
Where thy soul rests, and labour is no more.
Far as Euboea though thy country lay,
Our ships with ease transport thee in a day.
Thither of old, earth's giant son to view,
On wings of wind with Rhadamanth they flew;
This land, from whence their morning course begun,
Saw them returning with the setting sun.
Your eyes shall witness and confirm my tale,
Our youth how dexterous, and how fleet our sail,
When justly timed with equal sweep they row,
And ocean whitens in long tracks below."

Thus he. No word the experienced man replies,
But thus to heaven (and heavenward lifts his eyes):
"O Jove! O father! what the king accords
Do thou make perfect! sacred be his words!
Wide o'er the world Alcinous' glory shine!
Let fame be his, and ah! my country mine!"

Meantime Arete, for the hour of rest,
Ordains the fleecy couch, and covering vest;
Bids her fair train the purple quilts prepare,
And the thick carpets spread with busy care.
With torches blazing in their hands they pass'd,
And finish'd all their queen's command with haste:
Then gave the signal to the willing guest:
He rose with pleasure, and retired to rest.
There, soft extended, to the murmuring sound
Of the high porch, Ulysses sleeps profound!
Within, released from cares, Alcinous lies;
And fast beside were closed Arete's eyes.

Now fair Aurora lifts her golden ray,
And all the ruddy orient flames with day:
Alcinous, and the chief, with dawning light,
Rose instant from the slumbers of the night;
Then to the council-seat they bend their way,
And fill the shining thrones along the bay.

Meanwhile Minerva, in her guardian care,
Shoots from the starry vault through fields of air;
In form, a herald of the king, she flies
From peer to peer, and thus incessant cries;

"Nobles and chiefs who rule Phaeacia's states,
The king in council your attendance waits;
A prince of grace divine your aid implores,
O'er unknown seas arrived from unknown shores."

She spoke, and sudden with tumultuous sounds
Of thronging multitudes the shore rebounds:
At once the seats they fill; and every eye
Glazed, as before some brother of the sky.
Pallas with grace divine his form improves,
More high he treads, and more enlarged he moves:
She sheds celestial bloom, regard to draw;
And gives a dignity of mien, to awe;
With strength, the future prize of fame to play,
And gather all the honours of the day.

Then from his glittering throne Alcinous rose;
"Attend (he cried) while we our will disclose.
Your present aid this godlike stranger craves,
Toss'd by rude tempest through a war of waves;
Perhaps from realms that view the rising day,
Or nations subject to the western ray.
Then grant, what here all sons of wine obtain
(For here affliction never pleads in vain);
Be chosen youth prepared, expert to try
The vast profound and hid the vessel fly;
Launch the tall back, and order every oar;
Then in our court indulge the genial hour.
Instant, you sailors to this task attend;
Swift to the palace, all ye peers ascend;
Let none to strangers honours due disclaim:
Be there Demodocus the bard of fame,
Taught by the gods to please, when high he sings
The vocal lay, responsive to the strings."

Thus spoke the prince; the attending peers obey;
In state they move; Alcinous heads the way
Swift to Demodocus the herald flies,
At once the sailors to their charge arise;
They launch the vessel, and unfurl the sails,
And stretch the swelling canvas to the gales;
Then to the palace move: a gathering throng,
Youth, and white age, tumultuous pour along.
Now all accesses to the dome are fill'd;
Eight boars, the choicest of the herd, are kill'd;
Two beeves, twelve fatlings, from the flock they bring
To crown the feast; so wills the bounteous king,
The herald now arrives, and guides along
The sacred master of celestial song;
Dear to the Muse!  who gave his days to flow
With mighty blessings, mix'd with mighty woe;
With clouds of darkness quench'd his visual ray,
But gave him skill to raise the lofty lay.
High on a radiant throne sublime in state,
Encircled by huge multitudes, he sate;
With silver shone the throne; his lyre, well strung
To rapturous sounds, at hand Poutonous hung.
Before his seat a polish'd table shines,
And a full goblet foams with generous wines;
His food a herald bore; and now they fed;
And now the rage of craving hunger fled.

Then, fired by all the Muse, aloud he sings
The mighty deeds of demigods and kings;
From that fierce wrath the noble song arose,
That made Ulysses and Achilles foes;
How o'er the feast they doom the fall of Troy;
The stern debate Atrides hears with joy;
For Heaven foretold the contest, when he trod
The marble threshold of the Delphic god,
Curious to learn the counsels of the sky,
Ere yet he loosed the rage of war on Troy.

Touch'd at the song, Ulysses straight resign'd
To soft affliction all his manly mind.
Before his eyes the purple vest he drew,
Industrious to conceal the falling dew;
But when the music paused, he ceased to shed
The flowing tear, and raised his drooping head;
And, lifting to the gods a goblet crown'd,
He pour'd a pure libation to the ground.

Transported with the song, the listening train
Again with loud applause demand the strain;
Again Ulysses veil'd his pensive head.
Again unmann'd, a shower of sorrows shed;
Conceal'd he wept; the king observed alone
The silent tear, and heard the secret groan;
Then to the bard aloud--"O cease to sing,
Dumb be thy voice and mute the harmonious string;
Enough the feast has pleased, enough the power
Of heavenly song has crown'd the genial hour!
Incessant in the games your strength display,
Contest, ye brave the honours of the day!
That pleased the admiring stranger may proclaim
In distant regions the Phaeacian fame:
None wield the gauntlet with so dire a sway,
Or swifter in the race devour the way;
None in the leap spring with so strong a bound,
Or firmer, in the wrestling, press the ground."

Thus spoke the king; the attending peers obey;
In state they move, Alcinous lends the way;
His golden lyre Demodocus unstrung,
High on a column in the palace hung;
And guided by a herald's guardian cares,
Majestic to the lists of Fame repairs.

Now swarms the populace: a countless throng,
Youth and boar age; and man drives man along.
The games begin; ambitious of the prize,
Acroneus, Thoon, and Eretmeus rise;
The prize Ocyalus and Prymneus claim,
Anchialus and Ponteus, chiefs of fame.
There Proreus, Nautes, Eratreus, appear
And famed Amphialus, Polyneus' heir;
Euryalus, like Mars terrific, rose,
When clad in wrath he withers hosts of foes;
Naubolides with grace unequall'd shone,
Or equall'd by Laodamas alone.
With these came forth Ambasineus the strong:
And three brave sons, from great Alcinous sprung.

Ranged in a line the ready racers stand,
Start from the goal, and vanish o'er the strand:
Swift as on wings of winds, upborne they fly,
And drifts of rising dust involve the sky.
Before the rest, what space the hinds allow
Between the mule and ox, from plough to plough,
Clytonius sprung: he wing'd the rapid way,
And bore the unrivall'd honours of the day.
With fierce embrace the brawny wrestlers join;
The conquest, great Euryalus, is thine.
Amphialus sprung forward with a bound,
Superior in the leap, a length of ground.
From Elatreus' strong arm the discus flies,
And sings with unmatch'd force along the skies.
And Laodam whirls high, with dreadful sway,
The gloves of death, victorious in the fray.

While thus the peerage in the games contends,
In act to speak, Laodamas ascends.

"O friends (he cries), the stranger seems well skill'd
To try the illustrious labours of the field:
I deem him brave: then grant the brave man's claim,
Invite the hero to his share of fame.
What nervous arms he boasts! how firm his tread!
His limbs how turn'd! how broad his shoulders spread!
By age unbroke!--but all-consuming care
Destroys perhaps the strength that time would spare:
Dire is the ocean, dread in all its forms!
Man must decay when man contends with storms."

"Well hast thou spoke (Euryalus replies):
Thine is the guest, invite him thou to rise."
Swift as the word, advancing from the crowd,
He made obeisance, and thus spoke aloud:

"Vouchsafes the reverend stranger to display
His manly worth, and share the glorious day?
Father, arise! for thee thy port proclaims
Expert to conquer in the solemn games.
To fame arise! for what more fame can yield
Than the swift race, or conflict of the field?
Steal from corroding care one transient day,
To glory give the space thou hast to stay;
Short is the time, and lo! e'en now the gales
Call thee aboard, and stretch the swelling sails."

To whom with sighs Ulysses gave reply:
"Ah why the ill-suiting pastime must I try?
To gloomy care my thoughts alone are free;
Ill the gay sorts with troubled hearts agree;
Sad from my natal hour my days have ran,
A much-afflicted, much-enduring man!
Who, suppliant to the king and peers, implores
A speedy voyage to his native shore."
"Wise wanders, Laodam, thy erring tongue
The sports of glory to the brave belong
(Retorts Euryalus): he bears no claim
Among the great, unlike the sons of Fame.
A wandering merchant he frequents the main
Some mean seafarer in pursuit of gain;
Studious of freight, in naval trade well skill'd,
But dreads the athletic labours of the field."
Incensed, Ulysses with a frown replies:
"O forward to proclaim thy soul unwise!
With partial hands the gods their gifts dispense;
Some greatly think, some speak with manly sense;
Here Heaven an elegance of form denies,
But wisdom the defect of form supplies;
This man with energy of thought controls,
And steals with modest violence our souls;
He speaks reservedly, but he speaks with force,
Nor can one word be changed but for a worse;
In public more than mortal he appears,
And as he moves, the praising crowd reveres;
While others, beauteous as the etherial kind,
The nobler portion went, a knowing mind,
In outward show Heaven gives thee to excel.
But Heaven denies the praise of thinking well
I'll bear the brave a rude ungovern'd tongue,
And, youth, my generous soul resents the wrong.
Skill'd in heroic exercise, I claim
A post of honour with the sons of Fame.
Such was my boast while vigour crown'd my days,
Now care surrounds me, and my force decays;
Inured a melancholy part to bear
In scenes of death, by tempest and by war
Yet thus by woes impair'd, no more I waive
To prove the hero--slander stings the brave."

Then gliding forward with a furious bound
He wrench'd a rocky fragment from the ground
By far more ponderous, and more huge by far
Than what Phaeacia's sons discharged in air.
Fierce from his arm the enormous load he flings;
Sonorous through the shaded air it sings;
Couch'd to the earth, tempestuous as it flies,
The crowd gaze upward while it cleaves the skies.
Beyond all marks, with many a giddy round
Down-rushing, it up-turns a hill of ground.

That Instant Pallas, bursting from a cloud,
Fix'd a distinguish'd mark, and cried aloud:

"E'en he who, sightless, wants his visual ray
May by his touch alone award the day:
Thy signal throw transcends the utmost bound
Of every champion by a length of ground:
Securely bid the strongest of the train
Arise to throw; the strongest throws in vain."

She spoke: and momentary mounts the sky:
The friendly voice Ulysses hears with joy.
Then thus aloud (elate with decent pride)
"Rise, ye Phaecians, try your force (he cried):
If with this throw the strongest caster vie,
Still, further still, I bid the discus fly.
Stand forth, ye champions, who the gauntlet wield,
Or ye, the swiftest racers of the field!
Stand forth, ye wrestlers, who these pastimes grace!
I wield the gauntlet, and I run the race.
In such heroic games I yield to none,
Or yield to brave Laodamas alone:
Shall I with brave Laodamas contend?
A friend is sacred, and I style him friend.
Ungenerous were the man, and base of heart,
Who takes the kind, and pays the ungrateful part:
Chiefly the man, in foreign realms confined,
Base to his friend, to his own interest blind:
All, all your heroes I this day defy;
Give me a man that we our might may try.
Expert in every art, I boast the skill
To give the feather'd arrow wings to kill;
Should a whole host at once discharge the bow,
My well-aim'd shaft with death prevents the foe:
Alone superior in the field of Troy,
Great Philoctetes taught the shaft to fly.
From all the sons of earth unrivall'd praise
I justly claim; but yield to better days,
To those famed days when great Alcides rose,
And Eurytus, who bade the gods be foes
(Vain Eurytus, whose art became his crime,
Swept from the earth, he perish'd in his prime:
Sudden the irremeable way he trod,
Who boldly durst defy the bowyer god).
In fighting fields as far the spear I throw
As flies an arrow from the well-drawn bow.
Sole in the race the contest I decline,
Stiff are my weary joints, and I resign;
By storms and hunger worn; age well may fail,
When storms and hunger doth at once assail."

Abash'd, the numbers hear the godlike man,
Till great Alcinous mildly thus began:

"Well hast thou spoke, and well thy generous tongue
With decent pride refutes a public wrong:
Warm are thy words, but warm without offence;
Fear only fools, secure in men of sense;
Thy worth is known. Then hear our country's claim,
And bear to heroes our heroic fame:
In distant realms our glorious deeds display,
Repeat them frequent in the genial day;
When, blest with ease, thy woes and wanderings end,
Teach them thy consort, bid thy sons attend;
How, loved of Jove, he crown'd our sires with praise,
How we their offspring dignify our race.

"Let other realms the deathful gauntlet wield,
Or boast the glories of the athletic field:
We in the course unrivall'd speed display,
Or through cerulean billows plough the way;
To dress, to dance, to sing, our sole delight,
The feast or bath by day, and love by night:
Rise, then, ye skill'd in measures; let him bear
Your fame to men that breathe a distant air;
And faithful say, to you the powers belong
To race, to sail, to dance, to chant the song.

"But, herald, to the palace swift repair,
And the soft lyre to grace our pastimes bear."

Swift at the word, obedient to the king,
The herald flies the tuneful lyre to bring.
Up rose nine seniors, chosen to survey
The future games, the judges of the day
With instant care they mark a spacious round
And level for the dance the allotted ground:
The herald bears the lyre: intent to play,
The bard advancing meditates the lay.
Skill'd in the dance, tall youths, a blooming band,
Graceful before the heavenly minstrel stand:
Light bounding from the earth, at once they rise,
Their feet half-viewless quiver in the skies:
Ulysses gazed, astonish'd to survey
The glancing splendours as their sandals play.
Meantime the bard, alternate to the strings,
The loves of Mars and Cytherea sings:
How the stern god, enamour'd with her charms
Clasp'd the gay panting goddess in his arms,
By bribes seduced; and how the sun, whose eye
Views the broad heavens, disclosed the lawless joy.
Stung to the soul, indignant through the skies
To his black forge vindictive Vulcan flies:
Arrived, his sinewy arms incessant place
The eternal anvil on the massy base.
A wondrous net he labours, to betray
The wanton lovers, as entwined they lay,
Indissolubly strong; Then instant bears
To his immortal dome the finish'd snares:
Above, below, around, with art dispread,
The sure inclosure folds the genial bed:
Whose texture even the search of gods deceives,
Thin as the filmy threads the spider weaves,
Then, as withdrawing from the starry bowers,
He feigns a journey to the Lemnian shores,
His favourite isle: observant Mars descries
His wish'd recees, and to the goddess flies;
He glows, he burns, the fair-hair'd queen of love
Descends, smooth gliding from the courts of Jove,
Gay blooming in full charms: her hand he press'd
With eager joy, and with a sigh address'd:

"Come, my beloved! and taste the soft delights:
Come, to repose the genial bed invites:
Thy absent spouse, neglectful of thy charms,
Prefers his barbarous Sintians to thy arms!"

Then, nothing loth, the enamour'd fair he led,
And sunk transported on the conscious bed.
Down rush'd the toils, inwrapping as they lay
The careless lovers in their wanton play:
In vain they strive; the entangling snares deny
(Inextricably firm) the power to fly.
Warn'd by the god who sheds the golden day,
Stern Vulcan homeward treads the starry way:
Arrived, he sees, he grieves, with rage he burns:
Full horribly he roars, his voice all heaven returns.

"O Jove (he cried) O all ye powers above,
See the lewd dalliance of the queen of love!
Me, awkward me, she scorns; and yields her charms
To that fair lecher, the strong god of arms.
If I am lame, that stain my natal hour
By fate imposed; such me my parent bore.
Why was I born? See how the wanton lies!
Oh sight tormenting to a husband's eyes!
But yet, I trust, this once e'en Mars would fly
His fair-one's arms--he thinks her, once, too nigh.
But there remain, ye guilty, in my power,
Till Jove refunds his shameless daughter's dower.
Too dear I prized a fair enchanting face:
Beauty unchaste is beauty in disgrace."

Meanwhile the gods the dome of Vulcan throng;
Apollo comes, and Neptune comes along;
With these gay Hermes trod the starry plain;
But modesty withheld the goddess train.
All heaven beholds, imprison'd as they lie,
And unextinguish'd laughter shakes the sky.
Then mutual, thus they spoke: "Behold on wrong
Swift vengeance waits; and art subdues the strong!
Dwells there a god on all the Olympian brow
More swift than Mars, and more than Vulcan slow?
Yet Vulcan conquers, and the god of arms
Must pay the penalty for lawless charms."

Thus serious they; but he who gilds the skies,
The gay Apollo, thus to Hermes cries:
"Wouldst thou enchain'd like Mars, O Hermes, lie
And bear the shame like Mars to share the joy?"

"O envied shame! (the smiling youth rejoin'd;)
And thrice the chains, and thrice more firmly bind;
Gaze all ye gods, and every goddess gaze,
Yet eager would I bless the sweet disgrace."

Loud laugh the rest, e'en Neptune laughs aloud,
Yet sues importunate to loose the god.
"And free, (he cries) O Vulcan! free from shame
Thy captives; I ensure the penal claim."

"Will Neptune (Vulcan then) the faithless trust?
He suffers who gives surety for the unjust:
But say, if that lewd scandal of the sky,
To liberty restored, perfidious fly:
Say, wilt thou bear the mulct?" He instant cries,
"The mulct I bear, if Mars perfidious flies."

To whom appeased: "No more I urge delay;
When Neptune sues, my part is to obey."
Then to the snares his force the god applies;
They burst; and Mars to Thrace indignant flies:
To the soft Cyprian shores the goddess moves,
To visit Paphos and her blooming groves,
Where to the Power an hundred altars rise,
And breathing odours scent the balmy skies;
Concealed she bathes in consecrated bowers,
The Graces unguents shed, ambrosial showers,
Unguents that charm the gods! she last assumes
Her wondrous robes; and full the goddess blooms.

Thus sung the bard: Ulysses hears with joy,
And loud applauses read the vaulted sky.

Then to the sports his sons the king commands,
Each blooming youth before the monarch stands,
In dance unmatch'd! A wondrous ball is brought
(The work of Polypus, divinely wrought);
This youth with strength enormous bids it fly,
And bending backward whirls it to the sky;
His brother, springing with an active bound,
At distance intercepts it from the ground.
The ball dismissed, in dance they skim the strand,
Turn and return, and scarce imprint the sand.
The assembly gazes with astonished eyes,
And sends in shouts applauses to the skies.

Then thus Ulysses: "Happy king, whose name
The brightest shines in all the rolls of fame!
In subjects happy with surprise I gaze;
Thy praise was just; their skill transcends thy praise."

Pleas'd with his people's fame, the monarch hears,
And thus benevolent accosts the peers:
"Since wisdom's sacred guidance he pursues,
Give to the stranger-guest a stranger's dues:
Twelve princes in our realm dominion share,
O'er whom supreme, imperial power I bear;
Bring gold, a pledge of love: a talent bring,
A vest, a robe, and imitate your king.
Be swift to give: that he this night may share
The social feast of joy, with joy sincere.
And thou, Euryalus, redeem thy wrong;
A generous heart repairs a slanderous tongue."

The assenting peers, obedient to the king,
In haste their heralds send the gifts to bring.
Then thus Euryalus: "O prince, whose sway
Rules this bless'd realm, repentant I obey;
Be his this sword, whose blade of brass displays
A ruddy gleam; whose hilt a silver blaze;
Whose ivory sheath, inwrought with curious pride,
Adds graceful terror to the wearer's side."

He said, and to his hand the sword consign'd:
"And if (he cried) my words affect thy mind,
Far from thy mind those words, ye whirlwinds, bear,
And scatter them, ye storms, in empty air!
Crown, O ye heavens, with joy his peaceful hours,
And grant him to his spouse, and native shores."

"And blest be thou, my friend, (Ulysses cries,)
Crown him with every joy, ye favouring skies
To thy calm hours continued peace afford,
And never, never mayst thou want this sword,"

He said, and o'er his shoulder flung the blade.
Now o'er the earth ascends the evening shade:
The precious gifts the illustrious heralds bear,
And to the court the embodied peers repair.
Before the queen Alcinous' sons unfold
The vests, the robes, and heaps of shining gold;
Then to the radiant thrones they move in state:
Aloft, the king in pomp imperial sate.

Thence to the queen: "O partner of our reign,
O sole beloved! command thy menial train
A polish'd chest and stately robes to bear,
And healing waters for the bath prepare;
That, bathed, our guest may bid his sorrows cease,
Hear the sweet song, and taste the feast in peace.
A bowl that flames with gold, of wondrous frame,
Ourself we give, memorial of our name;
To raise in offerings to almighty Jove,
And every god that treads the courts above."

Instant the queen, observant of the king,
Commands her train a spacious vase to bring,
The spacious vase with ample streams suffice,
Heap the high wood, and bid the flames arise.
The flames climb round it with a fierce embrace,
The fuming waters bubble o'er the blaze.
Herself the chest prepares; in order roll'd
The robes, the vests are ranged, and heaps of gold
And adding a rich dress inwrought with art,
A gift expressive of her bounteous heart.
Thus spoke to Ithacus: "To guard with bands
Insolvable these gifts, thy care demands;
Lest, in thy slumbers on the watery main,
The hand of rapine make our bounty vain."

Then bending with full force around he roll'd
A labyrinth of bands in fold on fold,
Closed with Circaean art. A train attends
Around the bath: the bath the king ascends
(Untasted joy, since that disastrous hour,
He sail'd ill-fated from Calypso's bower);
Where, happy as the gods that range the sky,
He feasted every sense with every joy.
He bathes; the damsels with officious toil,
Shed sweets, shed unguents, in a shower of oil;
Then o'er his limbs a gorgeous robe he spreads,
And to the feast magnificently treads.
Full where the dome its shining valves expands,
Nausicaa blooming as a goddess stands;
With wondering eyes the hero she survey'd,
And graceful thus began the royal maid:

"Hail, godlike stranger! and when heaven restores
To thy fond wish thy long-expected shores,
This ever grateful in remembrance bear:
To me thou owest, to me, the vital air."

"O royal maid! (Ulysses straight returns)
Whose worth the splendours of thy race adorns,
So may dread Jove (whose arm in vengeance forms
The writhen bolt, and blackens heaven with storms),
Restore me safe, through weary wanderings toss'd,
To my dear country's ever-pleasing coast,
As while the spirit in this bosom glows,
To thee, my goddess, I address my vows;
My life, thy gift I boast!" He said, and sate
Fast by Alcinous on a throne of state.

Now each partakes the feast, the wine prepares,
Portions the food, and each his portion shares.
The bard a herald guides; the gazing throng
Pay low obeisance as he moves along:
Beneath a sculptur'd arch he sits enthroned,
The peers encircling form an awful round.
Then, from the chine, Ulysses carves with art
Delicious food, an honorary part:
"This, let the master of the lyre receive,
A pledge of love! 'tis all a wretch can give.
Lives there a man beneath the spacious skies
Who sacred honours to the bard denies?
The Muse the bard inspires, exalts his mind;
The muse indulgent loves the harmonious kind."

The herald to his hand the charge conveys,
Not fond of flattery, nor unpleased with praise.

When now the rage of hunger was allay'd,
Thus to the lyrist wise Ulysses said:
"O more than man! thy soul the muse inspires,
Or Phoebus animates with all his fires;
For who, by Phoebus uninform'd, could know
The woe of Greece, and sing so well the woe?
Just to the tale, as present at the fray,
Or taught the labours of the dreadful day:
The song recalls past horrors to my eyes,
And bids proud Ilion from her ashes rise.
Once more harmonious strike the sounding string,
The Epaean fabric, framed by Pallas, sing:
How stern Ulysses, furious to destroy,
With latent heroes sack'd imperial Troy.
If faithful thou record the tale of Fame,
The god himself inspires thy breast with flame
And mine shall be the task henceforth to raise
In every land thy monument of praise."

Full of the god he raised his lofty strain:
How the Greeks rush'd tumultuous to the main;
How blazing tents illumined half the skies,
While from the shores the winged navy flies;
How e'en in Ilion's walls, in deathful bands,
Came the stern Greeks by Troy's assisting hands:
All Troy up-heaved the steed; of differing mind,
Various the Trojans counsell'd: part consign'd
The monster to the sword, part sentence gave
To plunge it headlong in the whelming wave;
The unwise award to lodge it in the towers,
An offering sacred to the immortal powers:
The unwise prevail, they lodge it in the walls,
And by the gods' decree proud Ilion falls:
Destruction enters in the treacherous wood,
And vengeful slaughter, fierce for human blood.

He sung the Greeks stern-issuing from the steed,
How Ilion burns, how all her fathers bleed;
How to thy dome, Deiphobus! ascends
The Spartan king; how Ithacus attends
(Horrid as Mars); and how with dire alarms
He fights--subdues, for Pallas strings his arms

Thus while he sung, Ulysses' griefs renew,
Tears bathe his cheeks, and tears the ground bedew
As some fond matron views in mortal fight
Her husband falling in his country's right;
Frantic through clashing swords she runs, she flies,
As ghastly pale he groans, and faints and dies;
Close to his breast she grovels on the ground,
And bathes with floods of tears the gaping wound;
She cries, she shrieks: the fierce insulting foe
Relentless mocks her violence of woe:
To chains condemn'd, as wildly she deplores;
A widow, and a slave on foreign shores.

So from the sluices of Ulysses' eyes
Fast fell the tears, and sighs succeeded sighs:
Conceal'd he grieved: the king observed alone
The silent tear, and heard the secret groan;
Then to the bard aloud: "O cease to sing,
Dumb be thy voice, and mute the tuneful string;
To every note his tears responsive flow,
And his great heart heaves with tumultuous woe;
Thy lay too deeply moves: then cease the lay,
And o'er the banquet every heart be gay:
This social right demands: for him the sails,
Floating in air, invite the impelling gales:
His are the gifts of love: the wise and good
Receive the stranger as a brother's blood.

"But, friend, discover faithful what I crave;
Artful concealment ill becomes the brave:
Say what thy birth, and what the name you bore,
Imposed by parents in the natal hour?
(For from the natal hour distinctive names,
One common right, the great and lowly claims:)
Say from what city, from what regions toss'd,
And what inhabitants those regions boast?
So shalt thou instant reach the realm assign'd,
In wondrous ships, self-moved, instinct with mind;
No helm secures their course, no pilot guides;
Like man intelligent, they plough the tides,
Conscious of every coast, and every bay,
That lies beneath the sun's all-seeing ray;
Though clouds and darkness veil the encumber'd sky,
Fearless through darkness and through clouds they fly;
Though tempests rage, though rolls the swelling main,
The seas may roll, the tempests rage in vain;
E'en the stern god that o'er the waves presides,
Safe as they pass, and safe repass the tides,
With fury burns; while careless they convey
Promiscuous every guest to every bay,
These ears have heard my royal sire disclose
A dreadful story, big with future woes;
How Neptune raged, and how, by his command,
Firm rooted in a surge a ship should stand
A monument of wrath; how mound on mound
Should bury these proud towers beneath the ground.
But this the gods may frustrate or fulfil,
As suits the purpose of the Eternal Will.
But say through what waste regions hast thou stray'd
What customs noted, and what coasts survey'd;
Possess'd by wild barbarians fierce in arms,
Or men whose bosom tender pity warms?
Say why the fate of Troy awaked thy cares,
Why heaved thy bosom, and why flowed thy tears?
Just are the ways of Heaven: from Heaven proceed
The woes of man; Heaven doom'd the Greeks to bleed,
A theme of future song! Say, then, if slain
Some dear-loved brother press'd the Phrygian plain?
Or bled some friend, who bore a brother's part,
And claim'd by merit, not by blood, the heart?"

Then thus Ulysses: "Thou whom first in sway,
As first in virtue, these thy realms obey;
How sweet the products of a peaceful reign!
The heaven-taught poet and enchanting strain;
The well-filled palace, the perpetual feast,
A land rejoicing, and a people bless'd!
How goodly seems it ever to employ
Man's social days in union and in joy;
The plenteous hoard high-heap'd with cates divine,
And o'er the foaming bowl the laughing wine!

"Amid these joys, why seels thy mind to know
The unhappy series of a wanderer's woe?
Rememberance sad, whose image to review,
Alas, I must open all my wounds anew!
And oh, what first, what last shall I relate,
Of woes unnumbered sent by Heaven and Fate?

"Know first the man (though now a wretch distress'd)
Who hopes thee, monarch, for his future guest.
Behold Ulysses! no ignoble name,
Earth sounds my wisdom and high heaven my fame.

"My native soil is Ithaca the fair,
Where high Neritus waves his woods in air;
Dulichium, Same and Zaccynthus crown'd
With shady mountains spread their isles around.
(These to the north and night's dark regions run,
Those to Aurora and the rising sun).
Low lies our isle, yet bless'd in fruitful stores;
Strong are her sons, though rocky are her shores;
And none, ah none no lovely to my sight,
Of all the lands that heaven o'erspreads with light.
In vain Calypso long constrained my stay,
With sweet, reluctant, amorous delay;
With all her charms as vainly Circe strove,
And added magic to secure my love.
In pomps or joys, the palace or the grot,
My country's image never was forgot;
My absent parents rose before my sight,
And distant lay contentment and delight.

"Hear, then, the woes which mighty Jove ordain'd
To wait my passage from the Trojan land.
The winds from Ilion to the Cicons' shore,
Beneath cold Ismarus our vessels bore.
We boldly landed on the hostile place,
And sack'd the city, and destroy'd the race,
Their wives made captive, their possessions shared,
And every soldier found a like reward
I then advised to fly; not so the rest,
Who stay'd to revel, and prolong the feast:
The fatted sheep and sable bulls they slay,
And bowls flow round, and riot wastes the day.
Meantime the Cicons, to their holds retired,
Call on the Cicons, with new fury fired;
With early morn the gather'd country swarms,
And all the continent is bright with arms;
Thick as the budding leaves or rising flowers
O'erspread the land, when spring descends in showers:
All expert soldiers, skill'd on foot to dare,
Or from the bounding courser urge the war.
Now fortune changes (so the Fates ordain);
Our hour was come to taste our share of pain.
Close at the ships the bloody fight began,
Wounded they wound, and man expires on man.
Long as the morning sun increasing bright
O'er heaven's pure azure spreads the glowing light,
Promiscuous death the form of war confounds,
Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds;
But when his evening wheels o'erhung the main,
Then conquest crown'd the fierce Ciconian train.
Six brave companions from each ship we lost,
The rest escape in haste, and quit the coast,
With sails outspread we fly the unequal strife,
Sad for their loss, but joyful of our life.
Yet as we fled, our fellows' rites we paid,
And thrice we call'd on each unhappy shade,

"Meanwhile the god, whose hand the thunder forms,
Drives clouds on clouds, and blackens heaven with storms:
Wide o'er the waste the rage of Boreas sweeps,
And night rush'd headlong on the shaded deeps.
Now here, now there, the giddy ships are borne,
And all the rattling shrouds in fragments torn.
We furl'd the sail, we plied the labouring oar,
Took down our masts, and row'd our ships to shore.
Two tedious days and two long nights we lay,
O'erwatch'd and batter'd in the naked bay.
But the third morning when Aurora brings,
We rear the masts, we spread the canvas wings;
Refresh'd and careless on the deck reclined,
We sit, and trust the pilot and the wind.
Then to my native country had I sail'd:
But, the cape doubled, adverse winds prevail'd.
Strong was the tide, which by the northern blast
Impell'd, our vessels on Cythera cast,
Nine days our fleet the uncertain tempest bore
Far in wide ocean, and from sight of shore:
The tenth we touch'd, by various errors toss'd,
The land of Lotus and the flowery coast.
We climb'd the beach, and springs of water found,
Then spread our hasty banquet on the ground.
Three men were sent, deputed from the crew
(A herald one) the dubious coast to view,
And learn what habitants possess'd the place.
They went, and found a hospitable race:
Not prone to ill, nor strange to foreign guest,
They eat, they drink, and nature gives the feast
The trees around them all their food produce:
Lotus the name: divine, nectareous juice!
(Thence call'd Lo'ophagi); which whose tastes,
Insatiate riots in the sweet repasts,
Nor other home, nor other care intends,
But quits his house, his country, and his friends.
The three we sent, from off the enchanting ground
We dragg'd reluctant, and by force we bound.
The rest in haste forsook the pleasing shore,
Or, the charm tasted, had return'd no more.
Now placed in order on their banks, they sweep
The sea's smooth face, and cleave the hoary deep:
With heavy hearts we labour through the tide,
To coasts unknown, and oceans yet untried.

"The land of Cyclops first, a savage kind,
Nor tamed by manners, nor by laws confined:
Untaught to plant, to turn the glebe, and sow,
They all their products to free nature owe:
The soil, untill'd, a ready harvest yields,
With wheat and barley wave the golden fields;
Spontaneous wines from weighty clusters pour,
And Jove descends in each prolific shower,
By these no statues and no rights are known,
No council held, no monarch fills the throne;
But high on hills, or airy cliffs, they dwell,
Or deep in caves whose entrance leads to hell.
Each rules his race, his neighbour not his care,
Heedless of others, to his own severe.

"Opposed to the Cyclopean coast, there lay
An isle, whose hill their subject fields survey;
Its name Lachaea, crown'd with many a grove,
Where savage goats through pathless thickets rove:
No needy mortals here, with hunger bold,
Or wretched hunters through the wintry cold
Pursue their flight; but leave them safe to bound
From hill to hill, o'er all the desert ground.
Nor knows the soil to feed the fleecy care,
Or feels the labours of the crooked share;
But uninhabited, untill'd, unsown,
It lies, and breeds the bleating goat alone.
For there no vessel with vermilion prore,
Or bark of traffic, glides from shore to shore;
The rugged race of savages, unskill'd
The seas to traverse, or the ships to build,
Gaze on the coast, nor cultivate the soil,
Unlearn'd in all the industrious art of toil,
Yet here all produces and all plants abound,
Sprung from the fruitful genius of the ground;
Fields waving high with heavy crops are seen,
And vines that flourish in eternal green,
Refreshing meads along the murmuring main,
And fountains streaming down the fruitful plain.

"A port there is, inclosed on either side,
Where ships may rest, unanchor'd and untied;
Till the glad mariners incline to sail,
And the sea whitens with the rising gale,
High at the head, from out the cavern'd rock,
In living rills a gushing fountain broke:
Around it, and above, for ever green,
The busy alders form'd a shady scene;
Hither some favouring god, beyond our thought,
Through all surrounding shade our navy brought;
For gloomy night descended on the main,
Nor glimmer'd Phoebe in the ethereal plain:
But all unseen the clouded island lay,
And all unseen the surge and rolling sea,
Till safe we anchor'd in the shelter'd bay:
Our sails we gather'd, cast our cables o'er,
And slept secure along the sandy shore.
Soon as again the rosy morning shone,
Reveal'd the landscape and the scene unknown,
With wonder seized, we view the pleasing ground,
And walk delighted, and expatiate round.
Roused by the woodland nymphs at early dawn,
The mountain goats came bounding o'er the lawn:
In haste our fellows to the ships repair,
For arms and weapons of the sylvan war;
Straight in three squadrons all our crew we part,
And bend the bow, or wing the missile dart;
The bounteous gods afford a copious prey,
And nine fat goats each vessel bears away:
The royal bark had ten. Our ships complete
We thus supplied (for twelve were all the fleet).

"Here, till the setting sun roll'd down the light,
We sat indulging in the genial rite:
Nor wines were wanting; those from ample jars
We drain'd, the prize of our Ciconian wars.
The land of Cyclops lay in prospect near:
The voice of goats and bleating flocks we hear,
And from their mountains rising smokes appear.
Now sunk the sun, and darkness cover'd o'er
The face of things: along the sea-beat shore
Satiate we slept: but, when the sacred dawn
Arising glitter'd o'er the dewy lawn,
I call'd my fellows, and these words address'd
'My dear associates, here indulge your rest;
While, with my single ship, adventurous, I
Go forth, the manners of you men to try;
Whether a race unjust, of barbarous might,
Rude and unconscious of a stranger's right;
Or such who harbour pity in their breast,
Revere the gods, and succour the distress'd,'

"This said, I climb'd my vessel's lofty side;
My train obey'd me, and the ship untied.
In order seated on their banks, they sweep
Neptune's smooth face, and cleave the yielding deep.
When to the nearest verge of land we drew,
Fast by the sea a lonely cave we view,
High, and with darkening laurels covered o'er;
Were sheep and goats lay slumbering round the shore
Near this, a fence of marble from the rock,
Brown with o'eraching pine and spreading oak.
A giant shepherd here his flock maintains
Far from the rest, and solitary reigns,
In shelter thick of horrid shade reclined;
And gloomy mischiefs labour in his mind.
A form enormous! far unlike the race
Of human birth, in stature, or in face;
As some lone mountain's monstrous growth he stood,
Crown'd with rough thickets, and a nodding wood.
I left my vessel at the point of land,
And close to guard it, gave our crew command:
With only twelve, the boldest and the best,
I seek the adventure, and forsake the rest.
Then took a goatskin fill'd with precious wine,
The gift of Maron of Evantheus' line
(The priest of Phoebus at the Ismarian shrine).
In sacred shade his honour'd mansion stood
Amidst Apollo's consecrated wood;
Him, and his house, Heaven moved my mind to save,
And costly presents in return he gave;
Seven golden talents to perfection wrought,
A silver bowl that held a copious draught,
And twelve large vessels of unmingled wine,
Mellifluous, undecaying, and divine!
Which now, some ages from his race conceal'd,
The hoary sire in gratitude reveal'd.
Such was the wine: to quench whose fervent steam
Scarce twenty measures from the living stream
To cool one cup sufficed: the goblet crown'd
Breathed aromatic fragrances around.
Of this an ample vase we heaved aboard,
And brought another with provisions stored.
My soul foreboded I should find the bower
Of some fell monster, fierce with barbarous power;
Some rustic wretch, who lived in Heaven's despite,
Contemning laws, and trampling on the right.
The cave we found, but vacant all within
(His flock the giant tended on the green):
But round the grot we gaze; and all we view,
In order ranged our admiration drew:
The bending shelves with loads of cheeses press'd,
The folded flocks each separate from the rest
(The larger here, and there the lesser lambs,
The new-fallen young here bleating for their dams:
The kid distinguish'd from the lambkin lies);
The cavern echoes with responsive cries.
Capacious chargers all around were laid.
Full pails, and vessels of the milking trade.
With fresh provisions hence our fleet to store
My friends advise me, and to quit the shore.
Or drive a flock of sheep and goats away,
Consult our safety, and put off to sea.
Their wholesome counsel rashly I declined,
Curious to view the man of monstrous kind,
And try what social rites a savage lends:
Dire rites, alas! and fatal to my friends

"Then first a fire we kindle, and prepare
For his return with sacrifice and prayer;
The loaden shelves afford us full repast;
We sit expecting. Lo! he comes at last,
Near half a forest on his back he bore,
And cast the ponderous burden at the door.
It thunder'd as it fell. We trembled then,
And sought the deep recesses of the den.
New driven before him through the arching rock,
Came tumbling, heaps on heaps, the unnumber'd flock.
Big-udder'd ewes, and goats of female kind
(The males were penn'd in outward courts behind);
Then, heaved on high, a rock's enormous weight
To the cave's mouth he roll'd, and closed the gate
(Scarce twenty four-wheel'd cars, compact and strong,
The massy load could bear, or roll along).
He next betakes him to his evening cares,
And, sitting down, to milk his flocks prepares;
Of half their udders eases first the dams,
Then to the mother's teat submits the lambs;
Half the white stream to hardening cheese be press'd,
And high in wicker-baskets heap'd: the rest,
Reserved in bowls, supplied his nightly feast.
His labour done, he fired the pile, that gave
A sudden blaze, and lighted all the cave.
We stand discover'd by the rising fires;
Askance the giant glares, and thus inquires:

"'What are ye, guests? on what adventure, say,
Thus far ye wander through the watery way?
Pirates perhaps, who seek through seas unknown
The lives of others, and expose your own?'

"His voice like thunder through the cavern sounds;
My bold companions thrilling fear confounds,
Appall'd at sight of more than mortal man!
At length, with heart recover'd, I began:

"'From Troy's famed fields, sad wanderers o'er the main,
Behold the relics of the Grecian train:
Through various seas, by various perils toss'd,
And forced by storms, unwilling on your coast;
Far from our destined course and native land,
Such was our fate, and such high Jove's command!
Nor what we are befits us to disclaim,
Atrides' friends (in arms a mighty name),
Who taught proud Troy and all her sons to bow;
Victors of late, but humble suppliants now!
Low at thy knee thy succour we implore;
Respect us, human, and relieve us, poor.
At least, some hospitable gift bestow;
'Tis what the happy to the unhappy owe;
'Tis what the gods require: those gods revere;
The poor and stranger are their constant care;
To Jove their cause, and their revenge belongs,
He wanders with them, and he feels their wrongs."

"'Fools that ye are (the savage thus replies,
His inward fury blazing at his eyes),
Or strangers, distant far from our abodes,
To bid me reverence or regard the gods.
Know then, we Cyclops are a race above
Those air-bred people, and their goat-nursed Jove;
And learn, our power proceeds with thee and thine,
Not as he wills, but as ourselves incline.
But answer, the good ship that brought ye o'er,
Where lies she anchor'd? near or off the shore?'

"Thus he. His meditated fraud I find
(Versed in the turns of various human-kind):
And, cautious thus: 'Against a dreadful rock,
Fast by your shore the gallant vessel broke.
Scarce with these few I 'scaped; of all my train,
Whom angry Neptune, whelm'd beneath the main,
The scattered wreck the winds blew back again.'

"He answer'd with his deed: his bloody hand
Snatch'd two, unhappy! of my martial band;
And dash'd like dogs against the stony floor:
The pavement swims with brains and mingled gore.
Torn limb from limb, he spreads his horrid feast,
And fierce devours it like a mountain beast:
He sucks the marrow, and the blood he drains,
Nor entrails, flesh, nor solid bone remains.
We see the death from which we cannot move,
And humbled groan beneath the hand of Jove.
His ample maw with human carnage fill'd,
A milky deluge next the giant swill'd;
Then stretch'd in length o'er half the cavern'd rock,
Lay senseless, and supine, amidst the flock.
To seize the time, and with a sudden wound
To fix the slumbering monster to the ground,
My soul impels me! and in act I stand
To draw the sword; but wisdom held my hand.
A deed so rash had finished all our fate,
No mortal forces from the lofty gate
Could roll the rock. In hopeless grief we lay,
And sigh, expecting the return of day.
Now did the rosy-fingered morn arise,
And shed her sacred light along the skies;
He wakes, he lights the fire, he milks the dams,
And to the mother's teats submits the lambs.
The task thus finish'd of his morning hours,
Two more he snatches, murders, and devours.
Then pleased, and whistling, drives his flock before,
Removes the rocky mountain from the door,
And shuts again: with equal ease disposed,
As a light quiver's lid is oped and closed.
His giant voice the echoing region fills:
His flocks, obedient, spread o'er all the hills.

"Thus left behind, even in the last despair
I thought, devised, and Pallas heard my prayer.
Revenge, and doubt, and caution, work'd my breast;
But this of many counsels seem'd the best:
The monster's club within the cave I spied,
A tree of stateliest growth, and yet undried,
Green from the wood: of height and bulk so vast,
The largest ship might claim it for a mast.
This shorten'd of its top, I gave my train
A fathom's length, to shape it and to plane;
The narrower end I sharpen'd to a spire,
Whose point we harden'd with the force of fire,
And hid it in the dust that strew'd the cave,
Then to my few companions, bold and brave,
Proposed, who first the venturous deed should try,
In the broad orbit of his monstrous eye
To plunge the brand and twirl the pointed wood,
When slumber next should tame the man of blood.
Just as I wished, the lots were cast on four:
Myself the fifth. We stand and wait the hour.
He comes with evening: all his fleecy flock
Before him march, and pour into the rock:
Not one, or male or female, stayed behind
(So fortune chanced, or so some god designed);
Then heaving high the stone's unwieldy weight,
He roll'd it on the cave and closed the gate.
First down he sits, to milk the woolly dams,
And then permits their udder to the lambs.
Next seized two wretches more, and headlong cast,
Brain'd on the rock; his second dire repast.
I then approach'd him reeking with their gore,
And held the brimming goblet foaming o'er;
'Cyclop! since human flesh has been thy feast,
Now drain this goblet, potent to digest;
Know hence what treasures in our ship we lost,
And what rich liquors other climates boast.
We to thy shore the precious freight shall bear,
If home thou send us and vouchsafe to spare.
But oh! thus furious, thirsting thus for gore,
The sons of men shall ne'er approach thy shore,
And never shalt thou taste this nectar more,'

"He heard, he took, and pouring down his throat,
Delighted, swill'd the large luxurious draught,
'More! give me more (he cried): the boon be thine,
Whoe'er thou art that bear'st celestial wine!
Declare thy name: not mortal is this juice,
Such as the unbless'd Cyclopaean climes produce
(Though sure our vine the largest cluster yields,
And Jove's scorn'd thunder serves to drench our fields);
But this descended from the bless'd abodes,
A rill of nectar, streaming from the gods.'

"He said, and greedy grasped the heady bowl,
Thrice drained, and poured the deluge on his soul.
His sense lay covered with the dozy fume;
While thus my fraudful speech I reassume.
'Thy promised boon, O Cyclop! now I claim,
And plead my title; Noman is my name.
By that distinguish'd from my tender years,
'Tis what my parents call me, and my peers.

"The giant then: 'Our promis'd grace receive,
The hospitable boon we mean to give:
When all thy wretched crew have felt my power,
Noman shall be the last I will devour.'

"He said: then nodding with the fumes of wine
Droop'd his huge head, and snoring lay supine.
His neck obliquely o'er his shoulders hung,
Press'd with the weight of sleep that tames the strong:
There belch'd the mingled streams of wine and blood,
And human flesh, his indigested food.
Sudden I stir the embers, and inspire
With animating breath the seeds of fire:
Each drooping spirit with bold words repair,
And urged my train the dreadful deed to dare.
The stake now glow'd beneath the burning bed
(Green as it was) and sparkled fiery red,
Then forth the vengeful instrument I bring;
With beating hearts my fellows form a ring.
Urged my some present god, they swift let fall
The pointed torment on his visual ball.
Myself above them from a rising ground
Guide the sharp stake, and twirl it round and round.
As when a shipwright stands his workmen o'er,
Who ply the wimble, some huge beam to bore;
Urged on all hands, it nimbly spins about,
The grain deep-piercing till it scoops it out:
In his broad eye he whirls the fiery wood;
From the pierced pupil spouts the boiling blood;
Singed are his brows; the scorching lids grow black;
The jelly bubbles, and the fibres crack.
And as when armourers temper in the ford
The keen-edged pole-axe, or the shining sword,
The red-hot metal hisses in the lake,
Thus in his eye-ball hiss'd the plunging stake.
He sends a dreadful groan, the rocks around
Through all their inmost winding caves resound.
Scared we recoiled.  Forth with frantic hand,
He tore and dash'd on earth and gory brand;
Then calls the Cyclops, all that round him dwell,
With voice like thunder, and a direful yell.
From all their dens the one-eyed race repair,
From rifted rocks, and mountains bleak in air.
All haste assembled, at his well-known roar,
Inquire the cause, and crowd the cavern door.

"'What hurts thee, Polypheme? what strange affright
Thus breaks our slumbers, and disturbs the night?
Does any mortal, in the unguarded hour
Of sleep, oppress thee, or by fraud or power?
Or thieves insidious thy fair flock surprise?'
Thus they; the Cyclop from his den replies:

"'Friends, Noman kills me; Noman in the hour
Of sleep, oppresses me with fraudful power.'
'If no man hurt thee, but the hand divine
Inflict disease, it fits thee to resign:
To Jove or to thy father Neptune pray.'
The brethren cried, and instant strode away.
"Joy touch'd my secret soul and conscious heart,
Pleased with the effect of conduct and of art.
Meantime the Cyclop, raging with his wound,
Spreads his wide arms, and searches round and round:
At last, the stone removing from the gate,
With hands extended in the midst he sate;
And search'd each passing sheep, and fell it o'er,
Secure to seize us ere we reach'd the door
(Such as his shallow wit he deem'd was mine);
But secret I revolved the deep design:
'Twas for our lives my labouring bosom wrought;
Each scheme I turn'd, and sharpen'd every thought;
This way and that I cast to save my friends,
Till one resolve my varying counsel ends.

"Strong were the rams, with native purple fair,
Well fed, and largest of the fleecy care,
These, three and three, with osier bands we tied
(The twining bands the Cyclop's bed supplied);
The midmost bore a man, the outward two
Secured each side: so bound we all the crew,
One ram remain'd, the leader of the flock:
In his deep fleece my grasping hands I lock,
And fast beneath, in wooly curls inwove,
There cling implicit, and confide in Jove.
When rosy morning glimmer'd o'er the dales,
He drove to pasture all the lusty males:
The ewes still folded, with distended thighs
Unmilk'd lay bleating in distressful cries.
But heedless of those cares, with anguish stung,
He felt their fleeces as they pass'd along
(Fool that he was.) and let them safely go,
All unsuspecting of their freight below.

"The master ram at last approach'd the gate,
Charged with his wool, and with Ulysses' fate.
Him while he pass'd, the monster blind bespoke:
'What makes my ram the lag of all the flock?
First thou wert wont to crop the flowery mead,
First to the field and river's bank to lead,
And first with stately step at evening hour
Thy fleecy fellows usher to their bower.
Now far the last, with pensive pace and slow
Thou movest, as conscious of thy master's woe!
Seest thou these lids that now unfold in vain?
(The deed of Noman and his wicked train!)
Oh! did'st thou feel for thy afflicted lord,
And would but Fate the power of speech afford.
Soon might'st thou tell me, where in secret here
The dastard lurks, all trembling with his fear:
Swung round and round, and dash'd from rock to rock,
His battered brains should on the pavement smoke
No ease, no pleasure my sad heart receives,
While such a monster as vile Noman lives.'

"The giant spoke, and through the hollow rock
Dismiss'd the ram, the father of the flock.
No sooner freed, and through the inclosure pass'd,
First I release myself, my fellows last:
Fat sheep and goats in throngs we drive before,
And reach our vessel on the winding shore.
With joy the sailors view their friends return'd,
And hail us living whom as dead they mourn'd
Big tears of transport stand in every eye:
I check their fondness, and command to fly.
Aboard in haste they heave the wealthy sheep,
And snatch their oars, and rush into the deep.
"Now off at sea, and from the shallows clear,
As far as human voice could reach the ear,
With taunts the distant giant I accost:
'Hear me, O Cyclop! hear, ungracious host!
'Twas on no coward, no ignoble slave,
Thou meditatest thy meal in yonder cave;
But one, the vengeance fated from above
Doom'd to inflict; the instrument of Jove.
Thy barbarous breach of hospitable bands,
The god, the god revenges by my hands.'

"These words the Cyclop's burning rage provoke;
From the tall hill he rends a pointed rock;
High o'er the billows flew the massy load,
And near the ship came thundering on the flood.
It almost brush'd the helm, and fell before:
The whole sea shook, and refluent beat the shore,
The strong concussion on the heaving tide
Roll'd back the vessel to the island's side:
Again I shoved her off: our fate to fly,
Each nerve we stretch, and every oar we ply.
Just 'scaped impending death, when now again
We twice as far had furrow'd back the main,
Once more I raise my voice; my friends, afraid,
With mild entreaties my design dissuade:
'What boots the godless giant to provoke,
Whose arm may sink us at a single stroke?
Already when the dreadful rock he threw,
Old Ocean shook, and back his surges flew.
The sounding voice directs his aim again;
The rock o'erwhelms us, and we 'scaped in vain.'

"But I, of mind elate, and scorning fear,
Thus with new taunts insult the monster's ear:
'Cyclop! if any, pitying thy disgrace.
Ask, who disfigured thus that eyeless face?
Say 'twas Ulysses: 'twas his deed declare,
Laertes' son, of Ithaca the fair;
Ulysses, far in fighting fields renown'd,
Before whose arm Troy tumbled to the ground.'

"The astonished savage with a roar replies:
'Oh heavens! oh faith of ancient prophecies!
This, Telemus Eurymedes foretold
(The mighty seer who on these hills grew old;
Skill'd the dark fates of mortals to declare,
And learn'd in all wing'd omens of the air);
Long since he menaced, such was Fate's command;
And named Ulysses as the destined hand.
I deem'd some godlike giant to behold,
Or lofty hero, haughty, brave, and bold;
Not this weak pigmy wretch, of mean design,
Who, not by strength subdued me, but by wine.
But come, accept our gifts, and join to pray
Great Neptune's blessing on the watery way;
For his I am, and I the lineage own;
The immortal father no less boasts the son.
His power can heal me, and relight my eye;
And only his, of all the gods on high.'
"'Oh! could this arm (I thus aloud rejoin'd)
From that vast bulk dislodge thy bloody mind,
And send thee howling to the realms of night!
As sure as Neptune cannot give thee sight.'
"Thus I; while raging he repeats his cries,
With hands uplifted to the starry skies?
'Hear me, O Neptune; thou whose arms are hurl'd
From shore to shore, and gird the solid world;
If thine I am, nor thou my birth disown,
And if the unhappy Cyclop be thy son,
Let not Ulysses breathe his native air,
Laertes' son, of Ithaca the fair.
If to review his country be his fate,
Be it through toils and sufferings long and late;
His lost companions let him first deplore;
Some vessel, not his own, transport him o'er;
And when at home from foreign sufferings freed,
More near and deep, domestic woes succeed!'
With imprecations thus he fill'd the air,
And angry Neptune heard the unrighteous prayer,
A larger rock then heaving from the plain,
He whirl'd it round: it sung across the main;
It fell, and brush'd the stern: the billows roar,
Shake at the weight, and refluent beat the shore.
With all our force we kept aloof to sea,
And gain'd the island where our vessels lay.
Our sight the whole collected navy cheer'd.
Who, waiting long, by turns had hoped and fear'd.
There disembarking on the green sea side,
We land our cattle, and the spoil divide;
Of these due shares to every sailor fall;
The master ram was voted mine by all;
And him (the guardian of Ulysses' fate)
With pious mind to heaven I consecrate.
But the great god, whose thunder rends the skies,
Averse, beholds the smoking sacrifice;
And sees me wandering still from coast to coast,
And all my vessels, all my people, lost!
While thoughtless we indulge the genial rite,
As plenteous cates and flowing bowls invite;
Till evening Phoebus roll'd away the light;
Stretch'd on the shore in careless ease we rest,
Till ruddy morning purpled o'er the east;
Then from their anchors all our ships unbind,
And mount the decks, and call the willing wind.
Now, ranged in order on our banks we sweep.
With hasty strokes the hoarse-resounding deep;
Blind to the future, pensive with our fears,
Glad for the living, for the dead in tears."

"AT length we reach'd AEolias's sea-girt shore,
Where great Hippotades the sceptre bore,
A floating isle! high-raised by toil divine,
Strong walls of brass the rocky coast confine.
Six blooming youths, in private grandeur bred,
And six fair daughters, graced the royal bed;
These sons their sisters wed, and all remain
Their parents' pride, and pleasure of their reign.
All day they feast, all day the bowls flow round,
And joy and music through the isle resound;
At night each pair on splendid carpets lay,
And crown'd with love the pleasures of the day.
This happy port affords our wandering fleet
A month's reception, and a safe retreat.
Full oft the monarch urged me to relate
The fall of Ilion, and the Grecian fate;
Full oft I told: at length for parting moved;
The king with mighty gifts my suit approved.
The adverse winds in leathern bags he braced,
Compress'd their force, and lock'd each struggling blast.
For him the mighty sire of gods assign'd
The tempest's lood, the tyrant of the wind;
His word alone the listening storms obey,
To smooth the deep, or swell the foamy sea.
These in my hollow ship the monarch hung,
Securely fetter'd by a silver thong:
But Zephyrus exempt, with friendly gales
He charged to fill, and guide the swelling sails:
Rare gift! but O, what gift to fools avails!

"Nine prosperous days we plied the labouring oar;
The tenth presents our welcome native shore:
The hills display the beacon's friendly light,
And rising mountains gain upon our sight.
Then first my eyes, by watchful toils oppress'd,
Complied to take the balmy gifts of rest:
Then first my hands did from the rudder part
(So much the love of home possess'd my heart):
When lo! on board a fond debate arose;
What rare device those vessels might inclose?
What sum, what prize from AEolus I brought?
Whilst to his neighbour each express'd his thought:

"'Say, whence ye gods, contending nations strive
Who most shall please, who most our hero give?
Long have his coffers groan'd with Trojan spoils:
Whilst we, the wretched partners of his toils,
Reproach'd by want, our fruitless labours mourn,
And only rich in barren fame return.
Now AEolus, ye see, augments his store:
But come, my friends, these mystic gifts explore,'
They said: and (oh cursed fate!) the thongs unbound!
The gushing tempest sweeps the ocean round;
Snatch'd in the whirl, the hurried navy flew,
The ocean widen'd and the shores withdrew.
Roused from my fatal sleep I long debate
If still to live, or desperate plunge to fate;
Thus doubting, prostrate on the deck I lay,
Till all the coward thoughts of death gave way.

"Meanwhile our vessels plough the liquid plain,
And soon the known AEolian coast regain;
Our groan the rocks remurmur'd to the main.
We leap'd on shore, and with a scanty feast
Our thirst and hunger hastily repress'd;
That done, two chosen heralds straight attend
Our second progress to my royal friend;
And him amidst his jovial sons we found;
The banquet steaming, and the goblets crown'd;
There humbly stoop'd with conscious shame and awe,
Nor nearer than the gate presumed to draw.
But soon his sons their well-known guest descried,
And starting from their couches loudly cried:
'Ulysses here! what demon could'st thou meet
To thwart thy passage, and repel thy fleet?
Wast thou not furnish'd by our choicest care
For Greece, for home and all thy soul held dear?'
Thus they, In silence long my fate I mourn'd;
At length these words with accents low return'd:
`Me, lock'd in sleep, my faithless crew bereft
Of all the blessing of your godlike gift!
But grant, oh grant, our loss we may retrieve;
A favour you, and you alone can give.'

"Thus I with art to move their pity tried,
And touch'd the youths; but their stern sire replied:
'Vile wretch, begone! this instant I command
Thy fleet accursed to leave our hallow'd land.
His baneful suit pollutes these bless'd abodes,
Whose fate proclaims him hateful to the gods.'

"Thus fierce he said: we sighing went our way,
And with desponding hearts put off to sea.
The sailors spent with toils their folly mourn,
But mourn in vain; no prospect of return
Six days and nights a doubtful course we steer,
The next proud Lamos' stately towers appear,
And Laestrygonia's gates arise distinct in air.
The shepherd, quitting here at night the plain,
Calls, to succeed his cares, the watchful swain;
But he that scorns the chains of sleep to wear,
And adds the herdsman's to the shepherd's care,
So near the pastures, and so short the way,
His double toils may claim a double pay,
And join the labours of the night and day.

"Within a long recess a bay there lies,
Edged round with cliffs high pointing to the skies;
The jutting shores that swell on either side
Contract its mouth, and break the rushing tide.
Our eager sailors seize the fair retreat,
And bound within the port their crowded fleet:
For here retired the sinking billows sleep,
And smiling calmness silver'd o'er the deep.
I only in the bay refused to moor,
And fix'd without, my halsers to the shore.

"From thence we climb'd a point, whose airy brow
Commands the prospect of the plains below;
No tracks of beasts, or signs of men, we found,
But smoky volumes rolling from the ground.
Two with our herald thither we command,
With speed to learn what men possess'd the land.
They went, and kept the wheel's smooth-beaten road
Which to the city drew the mountain wood;
When lo! they met, beside a crystal spring,
The daughter of Antiphates the king;
She to Artacia's silver streams came down;
(Artacia's streams alone supply the town);
The damsel they approach, and ask'd what race
The people were? who monarch of the place?
With joy the maid the unwary strangers heard
And show'd them where the royal dome appear'd.
They went; but as they entering saw the queen
Of size enormous, and terrific mien
(Not yielding to some bulky mountain's height),
A sudden horror struck their aching sight.
Swift at her call her husband scour'd away
To wreak his hunger on the destined prey;
One for his food the raging glutton slew,
But two rush'd out, and to the navy flew.

"Balk'd of his prey, the yelling monster flies,
And fills the city with his hideous cries;
A ghastly band of giants hear the roar,
And, pouring down the mountains, crowd the shore.
Fragments they rend from off the craggy brow
And dash the ruins on the ships below;
The crackling vessels burst; hoarse groans arise,
And mingled horrors echo to the skies;
The men like fish, they struck upon the flood,
And cramm'd their filthy throats with human food.
Whilst thus their fury rages at the bay,
My sword our cables cut, I call'd to weigh;
And charged my men, as they from fate would fly,
Each nerve to strain, each bending oar to ply.
The sailors catch the word, their oars they seize,
And sweep with equal strokes the smoky seas;
Clear of the rocks the impatient vessel flies;
Whilst in the port each wretch encumber'd dies.
With earnest haste my frighted sailors press,
While kindling transports glow'd at our success;
But the sad fate that did our friends destroy,
Cool'd every breast, and damp'd the rising joy.

"Now dropp'd our anchors in the Aeaean bay,
Where Circe dwelt, the daughter of the Day!
Her mother Perse, of old Ocean's strain,
Thus from the Lun descended, and the Main
(From the same lineage stern Aeaetes came,
The far-famed brother of the enchantress dame);
Goddess, the queen, to whom the powers belong
Of dreadful magic and commanding song.
Some god directing to this peaceful bay
Silent we came, and melancholy lay,
Spent and o'erwatch'd. Two days and nights roll'd on,
And now the third succeeding morning shone.
I climb'd a cliff, with spear and sword in hand,
Whose ridge o'erlook'd a shady length of land;
To learn if aught of mortal works appear,
Or cheerful voice of mortal strike the ear?
From the high point I mark'd, in distant view,
A stream of curling smoke ascending blue,
And spiry tops, the tufted trees above,
Of Circe's palace bosom'd in the grove.

"Thither to haste, the region to explore,
Was first my thought: but speeding back to shore
I deem'd it best to visit first my crew,
And send our spies the dubious coast to view.
As down the hill I solitary go,
Some power divine, who pities human woe,
Sent a tall stag, descending from the wood,
To cool his fervour in the crystal flood;
Luxuriant on the wave-worn bank he lay,
Stretch'd forth and panting in the sunny ray.
I launch'd my spear, and with a sudden wound
Transpierced his back, and fix'd him to the ground.
He falls, and mourns his fate with human cries:
Through the wide wound the vital spirit flies.
I drew, and casting on the river's side
The bloody spear, his gather'd feet I tied
With twining osiers which the bank supplied.
An ell in length the pliant wisp I weaved,
And the huge body on my shoulders heaved:
Then leaning on my spear with both my hands,
Upbore my load, and press'd the sinking sands
With weighty steps, till at the ship I threw
The welcome burden, and bespoke my crew:

"'Cheer up, my friends! it is not yet our fate
To glide with ghosts through Pluto's gloomy gate.
Food in the desert land, behold! is given!
Live, and enjoy the providence of heaven.'

"The joyful crew survey his mighty size,
And on the future banquet feast their eyes,
As huge in length extended lay the beast;
Then wash their hands, and hasten to the feast.
There, till the setting sun roll'd down the light,
They sate indulging in the genial rite.
When evening rose, and darkness cover'd o'er
The face of things, we slept along the shore.
But when the rosy morning warm'd the east,
My men I summon'd, and these words address'd:
"'Followers and friends, attend what I propose:
Ye sad companions of Ulysses' woes!
We know not here what land before us lies,
Or to what quarter now we turn our eyes,
Or where the sun shall set, or where shall rise.
Here let us think (if thinking be not vain)
If any counsel, any hope remain.
Alas! from yonder promontory's brow
I view'd the coast, a region flat and low;
An isle encircled with the boundless flood;
A length of thickets, and entangled wood.
Some smoke I saw amid the forest rise,
And all around it only seas and skies!'

"With broken hearts my sad companions stood,
Mindful of Cyclops and his human food,
And horrid Laestrygons, the men of blood.
Presaging tears apace began to rain;
But tears in mortal miseries are vain.
In equal parts I straight divide my band,
And name a chief each party to command;
I led the one, and of the other side
Appointed brave Eurylochus the guide.
Then in the brazen helm the lots we throw,
And fortune casts Eurylochus to go;
He march'd with twice eleven in his train;
Pensive they march, and pensive we remain.

"The palace in a woody vale they found,
High raised of stone; a shaded space around;
Where mountain wolves and brindled lions roam,
(By magic tamed,) familiar to the dome.
With gentle blandishment our men they meet,
And wag their tails, and fawning lick their feet.
As from some feast a man returning late,
His faithful dogs all meet him at the gate,
Rejoicing round, some morsel to receive,
(Such as the good man ever used to give,)
Domestic thus the grisly beasts drew near;
They gaze with wonder not unmix'd with fear.
Now on the threshold of the dome they stood,
And heard a voice resounding through the wood:
Placed at her loom within, the goddess sung;
The vaulted roofs and solid pavement rung.
O'er the fair web the rising figures shine,
Immortal labour! worthy hands divine.
Polites to the rest the question moved
(A gallant leader, and a man I loved):

"'What voice celestial, chanting to the loom
(Or nymph, or goddess), echoes from the room?
Say, shall we seek access?' With that they call;
And wide unfold the portals of the hall.

"The goddess, rising, asks her guests to stay,
Who blindly follow where she leads the way.
Eurylochus alone of all the band,
Suspecting fraud, more prudently remain'd.
On thrones around with downy coverings graced,
With semblance fair, the unhappy men she placed.
Milk newly press'd, the sacred flour of wheat,
And honey fresh, and Pramnian wines the treat:
But venom'd was the bread, and mix'd the bowl,
With drugs of force to darken all the soul:
Soon in the luscious feast themselves they lost,
And drank oblivion of their native coast.
Instant her circling wand the goddess waves,
To hogs transforms them, and the sty receives.
No more was seen the human form divine;
Head, face, and members, bristle into swine:
Still cursed with sense, their minds remain alone,
And their own voice affrights them when they groan.
Meanwhile the goddess in disdain bestows
The mast and acorn, brutal food! and strows
The fruits and cornel, as their feast, around;
Now prone and grovelling on unsavoury ground.

"Eurylochus, with pensive steps and slow.
Aghast returns; the messenger of woe,
And bitter fate. To speak he made essay,
In vain essay'd, nor would his tongue obey.
His swelling heart denied the words their way:
But speaking tears the want of words supply,
And the full soul bursts copious from his eye.
Affrighted, anxious for our fellows' fates,
We press to hear what sadly he relates:

"We went, Ulysses! (such was thy command)
Through the lone thicket and the desert land.
A palace in a woody vale we found
Brown with dark forests, and with shades around.
A voice celestial echoed through the dome,
Or nymph or goddess, chanting to the loom.
Access we sought, nor was access denied:
Radiant she came: the portals open'd wide:
The goddess mild invites the guests to stay:
They blindly follow where she leads the way.
I only wait behind of all the train:
I waited long, and eyed the doors in vain:
The rest are vanish'd, none repass'd the gate,
And not a man appears to tell their fate.'

"I heard, and instant o'er my shoulder flung
The belt in which my weighty falchion hung
(A beamy blade): then seized the bended bow,
And bade him guide the way, resolved to go.
He, prostrate falling, with both hands embraced
My knees, and weeping thus his suit address'd:

"'O king, beloved of Jove, thy servant spare,
And ah, thyself the rash attempt forbear!
Never, alas! thou never shalt return,
Or see the wretched for whose loss we mourn.
With what remains from certain ruin fly,
And save the few not fated yet to die.'

"I answer'd stern: 'Inglorious then remain,
Here feast and loiter, and desert thy train.
Alone, unfriended, will I tempt my way;
The laws of fate compel, and I obey.'
This said, and scornful turning from the shore
My haughty step, I stalk'd the valley o'er.
Till now approaching nigh the magic bower,
Where dwelt the enchantress skill'd in herbs of power,
A form divine forth issued from the wood
(Immortal Hermes with the golden rod)
In human semblance. On his bloomy face
Youth smiled celestial, with each opening grace.
He seized my hand, and gracious thus began:
'Ah whither roam'st thou, much-enduring man?
O blind to fate! what led thy steps to rove
The horrid mazes of this magic grove?
Each friend you seek in yon enclosure lies,
All lost their form, and habitants of sties.
Think'st thou by wit to model their escape?
Sooner shalt thou, a stranger to thy shape,
Fall prone their equal: first thy danger know,
Then take the antidote the gods bestow.
The plant I give through all the direful bower
Shall guard thee, and avert the evil hour.
Now hear her wicked arts: Before thy eyes
The bowl shall sparkle, and the banquet rise;
Take this, nor from the faithless feast abstain,
For temper'd drugs and poison shall be vain.
Soon as she strikes her wand, and gives the word,
Draw forth and brandish thy refulgent sword,
And menace death: those menaces shall move
Her alter'd mind to blandishment and love.
Nor shun the blessing proffer'd to thy arms,
Ascend her bed, and taste celestial charms;
So shall thy tedious toils a respite find,
And thy lost friends return to human kind.
But swear her first by those dread oaths that tie
The powers below, the blessed in the sky;
Lest to thee naked secret fraud be meant,
Or magic bind thee cold and impotent.

"Thus while he spoke, the sovereign plant he drew
Where on the all-bearing earth unmark'd it grew,
And show'd its nature and its wondrous power:
Black was the root, but milky white the flower;
Moly the name, to mortals hard to find,
But all is easy to the ethereal kind.
This Hermes gave, then, gliding off the glade,
Shot to Olympus from the woodland shade.
While, full of thought, revolving fates to come,
I speed my passage to the enchanted dome.
Arrived, before the lofty gates I stay'd;
The lofty gates the goddess wide display'd;
She leads before, and to the feast invites;
I follow sadly to the magic rites.
Radiant with starry studs, a silver seat
Received my limbs: a footstool eased my feet,
She mix'd the potion, fraudulent of soul;
The poison mantled in the golden bowl.
I took, and quaff'd it, confident in heaven.
Then waved the wand, and then the word was given.
'Hence to thy fellows! (dreadful she began:)
Go, be a beast!'--I heard, and yet was man.

"Then, sudden whirling, like a waving flame,
My beamy falchion, I assault the dame.
Struck with unusual fear, she trembling cries,
She faints, she falls; she lifts her weeping eyes.

"'What art thou? say! from whence, from whom you came?
O more than human! tell thy race, thy name.
Amazing strength, these poisons to sustain!
Not mortal thou, nor mortal is thy brain.
Or art thou he, the man to come (foretold
By Hermes, powerful with the wand of gold),
The man from Troy, who wander'd ocean round;
The man for wisdom's various arts renown'd,
Ulysses? Oh! thy threatening fury cease;
Sheathe thy bright sword, and join our hands in peace!
Let mutual joys our mutual trust combine,
And love, and love-born confidence, be thine.'

"'And how, dread Circe! (furious I rejoin)
Can love, and love-born confidence, be mine,
Beneath thy charms when my companions groan,
Transform'd to beasts, with accents not their own?
O thou of fraudful heart, shall I be led
To share thy feast-rites, or ascend thy bed;
That, all unarm'd, thy vengeance may have vent,
And magic bind me, cold and impotent?
Celestial as thou art, yet stand denied;
Or swear that oath by which the gods are tied,
Swear, in thy soul no latent frauds remain,
Swear by the vow which never can be vain.'

"The goddess swore: then seized my hand, and led
To the sweet transports of the genial bed.
Ministrant to the queen, with busy care
Four faithful handmaids the soft rites prepare;
Nymphs sprung from fountains, or from shady woods,
Or the fair offspring of the sacred floods.
One o'er the couches painted carpets threw,
Whose purple lustre glow'd against the view:
White linen lay beneath. Another placed
The silver stands, with golden flaskets graced:
With dulcet beverage this the beaker crown'd,
Fair in the midst, with gilded cups around:
That in the tripod o'er the kindled pile
The water pours; the bubbling waters boil;
An ample vase receives the smoking wave;
And, in the bath prepared, my limbs I lave:
Reviving sweets repair the mind's decay,
And take the painful sense of toil away.
A vest and tunic o'er me next she threw,
Fresh from the bath, and dropping balmy dew;
Then led and placed me on the sovereign seat,
With carpets spread; a footstool at my feet.
The golden ewer a nymph obsequious brings,
Replenish'd from the cool translucent springs;
With copious water the bright vase supplies
A silver laver of capacious size.
I wash'd. The table in fair order spread,
They heap the glittering canisters with bread:
Viands of various kinds allure the taste,
Of choicest sort and savour, rich repast!
Circe in vain invites the feast to share;
Absent I ponder, and absorb'd in care;
While scenes of woe rose anxious in my breast,
The queen beheld me, and these words address'd:

"'Why sits Ulysses silent and apart,
Some hoard of grief close harbour'd at his heart
Untouch'd before thee stand the cates divine,
And unregarded laughs the rosy wine.
Can yet a doubt or any dread remain,
When sworn that oath which never can be vain?'

"I answered: 'Goddess! human is my breast,
By justice sway'd, by tender pity press'd:
Ill fits it me, whose friends are sunk to beasts,
To quaff thy bowls, or riot in thy feasts.
Me would'st thou please? for them thy cares employ,
And them to me restore, and me to joy.'

"With that she parted: in her potent hand
She bore the virtue of the magic wand.
Then, hastening to the sties, set wide the door,
Urged forth, and drove the bristly herd before;
Unwieldy, out they rush'd with general cry,
Enormous beasts, dishonest to the eye.
Now touch'd by counter-charms they change again,
And stand majestic, and recall'd to men.
Those hairs of late that bristled every part,
Fall off, miraculous effect of art!
Till all the form in full proportion rise,
More young, more large, more graceful to my eyes.
They saw, they knew me, and with eager pace
Clung to their master in a long embrace:
Sad, pleasing sight! with tears each eye ran o'er,
And sobs of joy re-echoed through the bower;
E'en Circe wept, her adamantine heart
Felt pity enter, and sustain'd her part.

"'Son of Laertes! (then the queen began)
Oh much-enduring, much experienced man!
Haste to thy vessel on the sea-beat shore,
Unload thy treasures, and the galley moor;
Then bring thy friends, secure from future harms,
And in our grottoes stow thy spoils and arms,'

"She said. Obedient to her high command
I quit the place, and hasten to the strand,
My sad companions on the beach I found,
Their wistful eyes in floods of sorrow drown'd.

"As from fresh pastures and the dewy field
(When loaded cribs their evening banquet yield)
The lowing herds return; around them throng
With leaps and bounds their late imprison'd young,
Rush to their mothers with unruly joy,
And echoing hills return the tender cry:
So round me press'd, exulting at my sight,
With cries and agonies of wild delight,
The weeping sailors; nor less fierce their joy
Than if return'd to Ithaca from Troy.
'Ah master! ever honour'd, ever dear!
(These tender words on every side I hear)
What other joy can equal thy return?
Not that loved country for whose sight we mourn,
The soil that nursed us, and that gave us breath:
But ah! relate our lost companions' death.'

"I answer'd cheerful: 'Haste, your galley moor,
And bring our treasures and our arms ashore:
Those in yon hollow caverns let us lay,
Then rise, and follow where I lead the way.
Your fellows live; believe your eyes, and come
To taste the joys of Circe's sacred dome.'

"With ready speed the joyful crew obey:
Alone Eurylochus persuades their stay.

"'Whither (he cried), ah whither will ye run?
Seek ye to meet those evils ye should shun?
Will you the terrors of the dome explore,
In swine to grovel, or in lions roar,
Or wolf-like howl away the midnight hour
In dreadful watch around the magic bower?
Remember Cyclops, and his bloody deed;
The leader's rashness made the soldiers bleed.'

"I heard incensed, and first resolved to speed
My flying falchion at the rebel's head.
Dear as he was, by ties of kindred bound,
This hand had stretch'd him breathless on the ground.
But all at once my interposing train
For mercy pleaded, nor could plead in vain.
'Leave here the man who dares his prince desert,
Leave to repentance and his own sad heart,
To guard the ship. Seek we the sacred shades
Of Circe's palace, where Ulysses leads.'

"This with one voice declared, the rising train
Left the black vessel by the murmuring main.
Shame touch'd Eurylochus' alter'd breast:
He fear'd my threats, and follow'd with the rest.

"Meanwhile the goddess, with indulgent cares
And social joys, the late transform'd repairs;
The bath, the feast, their fainting soul renews:
Rich in refulgent robes, and dropping balmy dews:
Brightening with joy, their eager eyes behold,
Each other's face, and each his story told;
Then gushing tears the narrative confound,
And with their sobs the vaulted roof resound.
When hush'd their passion, thus the goddess cries:
'Ulysses, taught by labours to be wise,
Let this short memory of grief suffice.
To me are known the various woes ye bore.
In storms by sea, in perils on the shore;
Forget whatever was in Fortune's power,
And share the pleasures of this genial hour.
Such be your mind as ere ye left your coast,
Or learn'd to sorrow for a country lost.
Exiles and wanderers now, where'er ye go,
Too faithful memory renews your woe:
The cause removed, habitual griefs remain,
And the soul saddens by the use of pain.'

"Her kind entreaty moved the general breast;
Tired with long toil, we willing sunk to rest.
We plied the banquet, and the bowl we crown'd,
Till the full circle of the year came round.
But when the seasons following in their train,
Brought back the months, the days, and hours again;
As from a lethargy at once they rise,
And urge their chief with animating cries:

"'Is this, Ulysses, our inglorious lot?
And is the name of Ithaca forgot?
Shall never the dear land in prospect rise,
Or the loved palace glitter in our eyes?
"Melting I heard; yet till the sun's decline
Prolong'd the feast, and quaff'd the rosy wine
But when the shades came on at evening hour,
And all lay slumbering in the dusky bower,
I came a suppliant to fair Circe's bed,
The tender moment seized, and thus I said:
'Be mindful, goddess! of thy promise made;
Must sad Ulysses ever be delay'd?
Around their lord my sad companions mourn,
Each breast beats homeward, anxious to return:
If but a moment parted from thy eyes,
Their tears flow round me, and my heart complies.'

"'Go then (she cried), ah go! yet think, not I,
Not Circe, but the Fates, your wish deny.
Ah, hope not yet to breathe thy native air!
Far other journey first demands thy care;
To tread the uncomfortable paths beneath,
And view the realms of darkness and of death.
There seek the Theban bard, deprived of sight;
Within, irradiate with prophetic light;
To whom Persephone, entire and whole,
Gave to retain the unseparated soul:
The rest are forms, of empty ether made;
Impassive semblance, and a flitting shade.'

"Struck at the word, my very heart was dead:
Pensive I sate: my tears bedew'd the bed:
To hate the light and life my soul begun,
And saw that all was grief beneath the sun:
Composed at length the gushing tears suppress'd,
And my toss'd limbs now wearied into rest.
'How shall I tread (I cried), ah, Circe! say,
The dark descent, and who shall guide the way?
Can living eyes behold the realms below?
What bark to waft me, and what wind to blow?'

"'Thy fated road (the magic power replied),
Divine Ulysses! ask no mortal guide.
Rear but the mast, the spacious sail display,
The northern winds shall wing thee on thy way.
Soon shalt thou reach old Ocean's utmost ends,
Where to the main the shelving shore descends;
The barren trees of Proserpine's black woods,
Poplars and willows trembling o'er the floods:
There fix thy vessel in the lonely bay,
And enter there the kingdoms void of day,
Where Phlegethon's loud torrents, rushing down,
Hiss in the flaming gulf of Acheron;
And where, slow rolling from the Stygian bed,
Cocytus' lamentable waters spread:
Where the dark rock o'erhangs the infernal lake,
And mingling streams eternal murmurs make.
First draw thy falchion, and on every side
Trench the black earth a cubit long and wide:
To all the shades around libations pour,
And o'er the ingredients strew the hallow'd flour:
New wine and milk, with honey temper'd bring,
And living water from the crystal spring.
Then the wan shades and feeble ghosts implore,
With promised offerings on thy native shore;
A barren cow, the stateliest of the isle,
And heap'd with various wealth, a blazing pile:
These to the rest; but to the seer must bleed
A sable ram, the pride of all thy breed.
These solemn vows and holy offerings paid
To all the phantom nations of the dead,
Be next thy care the sable sheep to place
Full o'er the pit, and hellward turn their face:
But from the infernal rite thine eye withdraw,
And back to Ocean glance with reverend awe.
Sudden shall skim along the dusky glades
Thin airy shoals, and visionary shades.
Then give command the sacrifice to haste,
Let the flay'd victims in the flame be cast,
And sacred vows and mystic song applied
To grisly Pluto and his gloomy bride.
Wide o'er the pool thy falchion waved around
Shall drive the spectres from unbidden ground:
The sacred draught shall all the dead forbear,
Till awful from the shades arise the seer.
Let him, oraculous, the end, the way,
The turns of all thy future fate display,
Thy pilgrimage to come, and remnant of thy day.'

"So speaking, from the ruddy orient shone
The morn, conspicuous on her golden throne.
The goddess with a radiant tunic dress'd
My limbs, and o'er me cast a silken vest.
Long flowing robes, of purest white, array
The nymph, that added lustre to the day:
A tiar wreath'd her head with many a fold;
Her waist was circled with a zone of gold.
Forth issuing then, from place to place I flew;
Rouse man by man, and animate my crew.
'Rise, rise, my mates! 'tis Circe gives command:
Our journey calls us; haste, and quit the land.'
All rise and follow, yet depart not all,
For Fate decreed one wretched man to fall.

"A youth there was, Elpenor was he named,
Not much for sense, nor much for courage famed:
The youngest of our band, a vulgar soul,
Born but to banquet, and to drain the bowl.
He, hot and careless, on a turret's height
With sleep repair'd the long debauch of night:
The sudden tumult stirred him where he lay,
And down he hasten'd, but forgot the way;
Full headlong from the roof the sleeper fell,
And snapp'd the spinal joint, and waked in hell.

"The rest crowd round me with an eager look;
I met them with a sigh, and thus bespoke:
'Already, friends! ye think your toils are o'er,
Your hopes already touch your native shore:
Alas! far otherwise the nymph declares,
Far other journey first demands our cares;
To tread the uncomfortable paths beneath,
The dreary realms of darkness and of death;
To seek Tiresias' awful shade below,
And thence our fortunes and our fates to know.'

"My sad companions heard in deep despair;
Frantic they tore their manly growth of hair;
To earth they fell: the tears began to rain;
But tears in mortal miseries are vain,
Sadly they fared along the sea-beat shore;
Still heaved their hearts, and still their eyes ran o'er.
The ready victims at our bark we found,
The sable ewe and ram together bound.
For swift as thought the goddess had been there,
And thence had glided, viewless as the air:
The paths of gods what mortal can survey?
Who eyes their motion? who shall trace their way?"

"Now to the shores we bend, a mournful train,
Climb the tall bark, and launch into the main;
At once the mast we rear, at once unbind
The spacious sheet, and stretch it to the wind;
Then pale and pensive stand, with cares oppress'd,
And solemn horror saddens every breast.
A freshening breeze the magic power supplied,
While the wing'd vessel flew along the tide;
Our oars we shipp'd; all day the swelling sails
Full from the guiding pilot catch'd the gales.

"Now sunk the sun from his aerial height,
And o'er the shaded billows rush'd the night;
When lo! we reach'd old Ocean's utmost bounds,
Where rocks control his waves with ever-during mounds.

"There in a lonely land, and gloomy cells,
The dusky nation of Cimmeria dwells;
The sun ne'er views the uncomfortable seats,
When radiant he advances, or retreats:
Unhappy race! whom endless night invades,
Clouds the dull air, and wraps them round in shades.

"The ship we moor on these obscure abodes;
Disbark the sheep, an offering to the gods;
And, hellward bending, o'er the beach descry
The doleful passage to the infernal sky.
The victims, vow'd to each Tartarian power,
Eurylochus and Perimedes bore.

"Here open'd hell, all hell I here implored,
And from the scabbard drew the shining sword:
And trenching the black earth on every side,
A cavern form'd, a cubit long and wide.
New wine, with honey-temper'd milk, we bring,
Then living waters from the crystal spring:
O'er these was strew'd the consecrated flour,
And on the surface shone the holy store.

"Now the wan shades we hail, the infernal gods,
To speed our course, and waft us o'er the floods:
So shall a barren heifer from the stall
Beneath the knife upon your altars fall;
So in our palace, at our safe return,
Rich with unnumber'd gifts the pile shall burn;
So shall a ram, the largest of the breed,
Black as these regions, to Tiresias bleed.

"Thus solemn rites and holy vows we paid
To all the phantom-nations of the dead;
Then died the sheep: a purple torrent flow'd,
And all the caverns smoked with streaming blood.
When lo! appear'd along the dusky coasts,
Thin, airy shoals of visionary ghosts:
Fair, pensive youths, and soft enamour'd maids;
And wither'd elders, pale and wrinkled shades;
Ghastly with wounds the forms of warriors slain
Stalk'd with majestic port, a martial train:
These and a thousand more swarm'd o'er the ground,
And all the dire assembly shriek'd around.
Astonish'd at the sight, aghast I stood,
And a cold fear ran shivering through my blood;
Straight I command the sacrifice to haste,
Straight the flay'd victims to the flames are cast,
And mutter'd vows, and mystic song applied
To grisly Pluto, and his gloomy bride.

"Now swift I waved my falchion o'er the blood;
Back started the pale throngs, and trembling stood,
Round the black trench the gore untasted flows,
Till awful from the shades Tiresias rose.

"There wandering through the gloom I first survey'd,
New to the realms of death, Elpenor's shade:
His cold remains all naked to the sky
On distant shores unwept, unburied lie.
Sad at the sight I stand, deep fix'd in woe,
And ere I spoke the tears began to flow.

"'O say what angry power Elpenor led
To glide in shades, and wander with the dead?
How could thy soul, by realms and seas disjoin'd,
Outfly the nimble sail, and leave the lagging wind?

"The ghost replied: 'To hell my doom I owe,
Demons accursed, dire ministers of woe!
My feet, through wine unfaithful to their weight,
Betray'd me tumbling from a towery height:
Staggering I reel'd, and as I reel'd I fell,
Lux'd the neck-joint--my soul descends to hell.
But lend me aid, I now conjure thee lend,
By the soft tie and sacred name of friend!
By thy fond consort! by thy father's cares!
By loved Telemachus' blooming years?
For well I know that soon the heavenly powers
Will give thee back to-day, and Circe's shores:
There pious on my cold remains attend,
There call to mind thy poor departed friend.
The tribute of a tear is all I crave,
And the possession of a peaceful grave.
But if, unheard, in vain compassion plead,
Revere the gods. The gods avenge the dead!
A tomb along the watery margin raise,
The tomb with manly arms and trophies grace,
To show posterity Elpenor was.
There high in air, memorial of my name,
Fix the smooth oar, and bid me live to fame.'

"To whom with tears: 'These rites, O mournful shade,
Due to thy ghost, shall to thy ghost be paid.'

"Still as I spoke the phantom seem'd to moan,
Tear follow'd tear, and groan succeeded groan.
But, as my waving sword the blood surrounds,
The shade withdrew, and mutter'd empty sounds.

"There as the wondrous visions I survey'd,
All pale ascends my royal mother's shade:
A queen, to Troy she saw our legions pass;
Now a thin form is all Anticlea was!
Struck at the sight I melt with filial woe,
And down my cheek the pious sorrows flow,
Yet as I shook my falchion o'er the blood,
Regardless of her son the parent stood.

"When lo! the mighty Theban I behold,
To guide his steps he bore a staff of gold;
Awful he trod; majestic was his look!
And from his holy lips these accents broke:

"'Why, mortal, wanderest thou from cheerful day,
To tread the downward, melancholy way?
What angry gods to these dark regions led
Thee, yet alive, companion of the deed?
But sheathe thy poniard, while my tongue relates
Heaven's steadfast purpose, and thy future fates.'

"While yet he spoke, the prophet I obey'd,
And in the scabbard plunged the glittering blade:
Eager he quaff'd the gore, and then express'd
Dark things to come, the counsels of his breast.

"Weary of light, Ulysses here explores
A prosperous voyage to his native shores;
But know--by me unerring Fates disclose
New trains of dangers, and new scenes of woes.
I see, I see, thy bark by Neptune toss'd,
For injured Cyclops, and his eyeball lost!
Yet to thy woes the gods decree an end,
If Heaven thou please: and how to please attend
Where on Trinacrian rocks the ocean roars,
Graze numerous herds along the verdant shores;
Though hunger press, yet fly the dangerous prey,
The herds are sacred to the god of day,
Who all surveys with his extensive eye,
Above, below, on earth, and in the sky!
Rob not the god; and so propitious gales
Attend thy voyage, and impel thy sails:
But, if his herds ye seize, beneath the waves
I see thy friends o'erwhelm'd in liquid graves!
The direful wreck Ulysses scarce survives!
Ulysses at his country scarce arrives!
Strangers thy guides! nor there thy labours end;
New foes arise; domestic ills attend!
There foul adulterers to thy bride resort,
And lordly gluttons riot in thy court.
But vengeance hastes amain! These eyes behold
The deathful scene, princes on princes roll'd!
That done, a people far from sea explore,
Who ne'er knew salt, or heard the billows roar,
Or saw gay vessel stem the watery plain,
A painted wonder flying on the main!
Bear on thy back an oar: with strange amaze
A shepherd meeting thee, the oar surveys,
And names a van: there fix it on the plain,
To calm the god that holds the watery reign;
A threefold offering to his altar bring,
A bull, a ram, a boar; and hail the ocean king.
But home return'd, to each ethereal power
Slay the due victim in the genial hour:
So peaceful shalt thou end thy blissful days,
And steal thyself from life by slow decays:
Unknown to pain, in age resign thy breath,
When late stern Neptune points the shaft with death:
To the dark grave retiring as to rest,
Thy people blessing, by thy people bless'd!

"Unerring truths, O man, my lips relate;
This is thy life to come, and this is fate.'

"To whom unmoved: 'If this the gods prepare,
What Heaven ordains the wise with courage bear.
But say, why yonder on the lonely strands,
Unmindful of her son, Anticlea stands?
Why to the ground she bends her downcast eye?
Why is she silent, while her son is nigh?
The latent cause, O sacred seer, reveal!'

"'Nor this (replies the seer) will I conceal.
Know, to the spectres that thy beverage taste,
The scenes of life recur, and actions past:
They, seal'd with truth, return the sure reply;
The rest, repell'd, a train oblivious fly.'

"The phantom-prophet ceased, and sunk from sight,
To the black palace of eternal night.

"Still in the dark abodes of death I stood,
When near Anticlea moved, and drank the blood.
Straight all the mother in her soul awakes,
And, owning her Ulysses, thus she speaks;
'Comest thou, my son, alive, to realms beneath,
The dolesome realms of darkness and of death!
Comest thou alive from pure, ethereal day?
Dire is the region, dismal is the way!
Here lakes profound, there floods oppose their waves,
There the wide sea with all his billows raves!
Or (since to dust proud Troy submits her towers)
Comest thou a wanderer from the Phrygian shores?
Or say, since honour call'd thee to the field,
Hast thou thy Ithaca, thy bride, beheld?'

"'Source of my life,' I cried, 'from earth I fly
To seek Tiresias in the nether sky,
To learn my doom; for, toss'd from woe to woe,
In every land Ulysses finds a foe:
Nor have these eyes beheld my native shores,
Since in the dust proud Troy submits her towers.

"'But, when thy soul from her sweet mansion fled,
Say, what distemper gave thee to the dead?
Has life's fair lamp declined by slow decays,
Or swift expired it in a sudden blaze?
Say, if my sire, good old Laertes, lives?
If yet Telemachus, my son, survives?
Say, by his rule is my dominion awed,
Or crush'd by traitors with an iron rod?
Say, if my spouse maintains her royal trust;
Though tempted, chaste, and obstinately just?
Or if no more her absent lord she wails,
But the false woman o'er the wife prevails?'

"Thus I, and thus the parent-shade returns:
'Thee, ever thee, thy faithful consort mourns:
Whether the night descends or day prevails,
Thee she by night, and thee by day bewails.
Thee in Telemachus thy realm obeys;
In sacred groves celestial rites he pays,
And shares the banquet in superior state,
Graced with such honours as become the great
Thy sire in solitude foments his care:
The court is joyless, for thou art not there!
No costly carpets raise his hoary head,
No rich embroidery shines to grace his bed;
Even when keen winter freezes in the skies,
Rank'd with his slaves, on earth the monarch lies:
Deep are his sighs, his visage pale, his dress
The garb of woe and habit of distress.
And when the autumn takes his annual round,
The leafy honours scattering on the ground,
Regardless of his years, abroad he lies,
His bed the leaves, his canopy the skies.
Thus cares on cares his painful days consume,
And bow his age with sorrow to the tomb!

"'For thee, my son, I wept my life away;
For thee through hell's eternal dungeons stray:
Nor came my fate by lingering pains and slow,
Nor bent the silver-shafted queen her bow;
No dire disease bereaved me of my breath;
Thou, thou, my son, wert my disease and death;
Unkindly with my love my son conspired,
For thee I lived, for absent thee expired.'

"Thrice in my arms I strove her shade to bind,
Thrice through my arms she slipp'd like empty wind,
Or dreams, the vain illusions of the mind.
Wild with despair, I shed a copious tide
Of flowing tears, and thus with sighs replied:

"'Fliest thou, loved shade, while I thus fondly mourn!
Turn to my arms, to my embraces turn!
Is it, ye powers that smile at human harms!
Too great a bliss to weep within her arms?
Or has hell's queen an empty image sent,
That wretched I might e'en my joys lament?'

"'O son of woe,' the pensive shade rejoin'd;
'O most inured to grief of all mankind!
"'Tis not the queen of hell who thee deceives;
All, all are such, when life the body leaves:
No more the substance of the man remains,
Nor bounds the blood along the purple veins:
These the funereal flames in atoms bear,
To wander with the wind in empty air:
While the impassive soul reluctant flies,
Like a vain dream, to these infernal skies.
But from the dark dominions speed the way,
And climb the steep ascent to upper day:
To thy chaste bride the wondrous story tell,
The woes, the horrors, and the laws of hell.'

"Thus while she spoke, in swarms hell's empress brings
Daughters and wives of heroes and of kings;
Thick and more thick they gather round the blood,
Ghost thronged on ghost (a dire assembly) stood!
Dauntless my sword I seize: the airy crew,
Swift as it flash'd along the gloom, withdrew;
Then shade to shade in mutual forms succeeds,
Her race recounts, and their illustrious deeds.

"Tyro began, whom great Salmoneus bred;
The royal partner of famed Cretheus' bed.
For fair Enipeus, as from fruitful urns
He pours his watery store, the virgin burns;
Smooth flows the gentle stream with wanton pride,
And in soft mazes rolls a silver tide.
As on his banks the maid enamour'd roves,
The monarch of the deep beholds and loves;
In her Enipeus' form and borrow'd charms
The amorous god descends into her arms:
Around, a spacious arch of waves he throws,
And high in air the liquid mountain rose;
Thus in surrounding floods conceal'd, he proves
The pleasing transport, and completes his loves.
Then, softly sighing, he the fair address'd,
And as he spoke her tender hand he press'd.
'Hail, happy nymph! no vulgar births are owed
To the prolific raptures of a god:
Lo! when nine times the moon renews her horn,
Two brother heroes shall from thee be born;
Thy early care the future worthies claim,
To point them to the arduous paths of fame;
But in thy breast the important truth conceal,
Nor dare the secret of a god reveal:
For know, thou Neptune view'st! and at my nod
Earth trembles, and the waves confess their god.'

"He added not, but mounting spurn'd the plain,
Then plunged into the chambers of the main,

"Now in the time's full process forth she brings
Jove's dread vicegerents in two future kings;
O'er proud Iolcos Pelias stretch'd his reign,
And godlike Neleus ruled the Pylian plain:
Then, fruitful, to her Cretheus' royal bed
She gallant Pheres and famed Aeson bred;
From the same fountain Amythaon rose,
Pleased with the din of scar; and noble shout of foes.

"There moved Antiope, with haughty charms,
Who bless'd the almighty Thunderer in her arms:
Hence sprung Amphion, hence brave Zethus came,
Founders of Thebes, and men of mighty name;
Though bold in open field, they yet surround
The town with walls, and mound inject on mound;
Here ramparts stood, there towers rose high in air,
And here through seven wide portals rush'd the war.

"There with soft step the fair Alcmena trod,
Who bore Alcides to the thundering god:
And Megara, who charm'd the son of Jove,
And soften'd his stern soul to tender love.

"Sullen and sour, with discontented mien,
Jocasta frown'd, the incestuous Theban queen;
With her own son she join'd in nuptial bands,
Though father's blood imbrued his murderous hands
The gods and men the dire offence detest,
The gods with all their furies rend his breast;
In lofty Thebes he wore the imperial crown,
A pompous wretch! accursed upon a throne.
The wife self-murder'd from a beam depends,
And her foul soul to blackest hell descends;
Thence to her son the choicest plagues she brings,
And the fiends haunt him with a thousand stings.

"And now the beauteous Chloris I descry,
A lovely shade, Amphion's youngest joy!
With gifts unnumber'd Neleus sought her arms,
Nor paid too dearly for unequall'd charms;
Great in Orchomenos, in Pylos great,
He sway'd the sceptre with imperial state.
Three gallant sons the joyful monarch told,
Sage Nestor, Periclimenus the bold,
And Chromius last; but of the softer race,
One nymph alone, a myracle of grace.
Kings on their thrones for lovely Pero burn;
The sire denies, and kings rejected mourn.
To him alone the beauteous prize he yields,
Whose arm should ravish from Phylacian fields
The herds of Iphyclus, detain'd in wrong;
Wild, furious herds, unconquerably strong!
This dares a seer, but nought the seer prevails,
In beauty's cause illustriously he fails;
Twelve moons the foe the captive youth detains
In painful dungeons, and coercive chains;
The foe at last from durance where he lay,
His heart revering, give him back to day;
Won by prophetic knowledge, to fulfil
The steadfast purpose of the Almighty will.

"With graceful port advancing now I spied,
Leda the fair, the godlike Tyndar's bride:
Hence Pollux sprung, who wields the furious sway
The deathful gauntlet, matchless in the fray;
And Castor, glorious on the embattled plain,
Curbs the proud steeds, reluctant to the rein:
By turns they visit this ethereal sky,
And live alternate, and alternate die:
In hell beneath, on earth, in heaven above,
Reign the twin-gods, the favourite sons of Jove.

"There Ephimedia trod the gloomy plain,
Who charm'd the monarch of the boundless main:
Hence Ephialtes, hence stern Otus sprung,
More fierce than giants, more than giants strong;
The earth o'erburden'd groan'd beneath their weight,
None but Orion e'er surpassed their height:
The wondrous youths had scarce nine winters told,
When high in air, tremendous to behold,
Nine ells aloft they rear'd their towering head,
And full nine cubits broad their shoulders spread.
Proud of their strength, and more than mortal size,
The gods they challenge, and affect the skies:
Heaved on Olympus tottering Ossa stood;
On Ossa, Pelion nods with all his wood.
Such were they youths I had they to manhood grown
Almighty Jove had trembled on his throne,
But ere the harvest of the beard began
To bristle on the chin, and promise man,
His shafts Apollo aim'd; at once they sound,
And stretch the giant monsters o'er the ground.

"There mournful Phaedra with sad Procris moves,
Both beauteous shades, both hapless in their loves;
And near them walk'd with solemn pace and slow,
Sad Adriadne, partner of their woe:
The royal Minos Ariadne bred,
She Theseus loved, from Crete with Theseus fled:
Swift to the Dian isle the hero flies,
And towards his Athens bears the lovely prize;
There Bacchus with fierce rage Diana fires,
The goddess aims her shaft, the nymph expires.

"There Clymene and Mera I behold,
There Eriphyle weeps, who loosely sold
Her lord, her honour, for the lust of gold.
But should I all recount, the night would fail,
Unequal to the melancholy tale:
And all-composing rest my nature craves,
Here in the court, or yonder on the waves;
In you I trust, and in the heavenly powers,
To land Ulysses on his native shores."

He ceased; but left so charming on their ear
His voice, that listening still they seem'd to hear,
Till, rising up, Arete silence broke,
Stretch'd out her snowy hand, and thus she spoke:

"What wondrous man heaven sends us in our guest;
Through all his woes the hero shines confess'd;
His comely port, his ample frame express
A manly air, majestic in distress.
He, as my guest, is my peculiar care:
You share the pleasure, then in bounty share
To worth in misery a reverence pay,
And with a generous hand reward his stay;
For since kind heaven with wealth our realm has bless'd,
Give it to heaven by aiding the distress'd."

Then sage Echeneus, whose grave reverend brow
The hand of time had silvered o'er with snow,
Mature in wisdom rose: "Your words (he cries)
Demand obedience, for your words are wise.
But let our king direct the glorious way
To generous acts; our part is to obey."

"While life informs these limbs (the king replied),
Well to deserve, be all my cares employed:
But here this night the royal guest detain,
Till the sun flames along the ethereal plain.
Be it my task to send with ample stores
The stranger from our hospitable shores:
Tread you my steps! 'Tis mine to lead the race,
The first in glory, as the first in place."

To whom the prince: "This night with joy I stay
O monarch great in virtue as in sway!
If thou the circling year my stay control,
To raise a bounty noble as thy soul;
The circling year I wait, with ampler stores
And fitter pomp to hail my native shores:
Then by my realms due homage would be paid;
For wealthy kings are loyally obeyed!"

"O king! for such thou art, and sure thy blood
Through veins (he cried) of royal fathers flow'd:
Unlike those vagrants who on falsehood live,
Skill'd in smooth tales, and artful to deceive;
Thy better soul abhors the liar's part,
Wise is thy voice, and noble is thy heart.
Thy words like music every breast control,
Steal through the ear, and win upon the soul;
soft, as some song divine, thy story flows,
Nor better could the Muse record thy woes.

"But say, upon the dark and dismal coast,
Saw'st thou the worthies of the Grecian host?
The godlike leaders who, in battle slain,
Fell before Troy, and nobly press'd the plain?
And lo! a length of night behind remains,
The evening stars still mount the ethereal plains.
Thy tale with raptures I could hear thee tell,
Thy woes on earth, the wondrous scenes in hell,
Till in the vault of heaven the stars decay.
And the sky reddens with the rising day."

"O worthy of the power the gods assign'd
(Ulysses thus replies), a king in mind:
Since yet the early hour of night allows
Time for discourse, and time for soft repose,
If scenes of misery can entertain,
Woes I unfold, of woes a dismal train.
Prepare to heir of murder and of blood;
Of godlike heroes who uninjured stood
Amidst a war of spears in foreign lands,
Yet bled at home, and bled by female hands.

"Now summon'd Proserpine to hell's black hall
The heroine shades: they vanish'd at her call.
When lo! advanced the forms of heroes slain
By stern AEgysthus, a majestic train:
And, high above the rest Atrides press'd the plain.
He quaff'd the gore; and straight his soldier knew,
And from his eyes pour'd down the tender dew:
His arms he stretch'd; his arms the touch deceive,
Nor in the fond embrace, embraces give:
His substance vanish'd, and his strength decay'd,
Now all Atrides is an empty shade.

"Moved at the sight, I for a apace resign'd
To soft affliction all my manly mind;
At last with tears: 'O what relentless doom,
Imperial phantom, bow'd thee to the tomb?
Say while the sea, and while the tempest raves,
Has Fate oppress'd thee in the roaring waves,
Or nobly seized thee in the dire alarms
Of war and slaughter, and the clash of arms?'

"The ghost returns: 'O chief of human kind
For active courage and a patient mind;
Nor while the sea, nor while the tempest raves
Has Fate oppress'd me on the roaring waves!
Nor nobly seized me in the dire alarms
Of war and slaughter, and the clash of arms
Stabb'd by a murderous hand Atrides died,
A foul adulterer, and a faithless bride;
E'en in my mirth, and at the friendly feast,
O'er the full bowl, the traitor stabb'd his guest;
Thus by the gory arm of slaughter falls
The stately ox, and bleeds within the stalls.
But not with me the direful murder ends,
These, these expired! their crime, they were my friends:
Thick as the boars, which some luxurious lord
Kills for the feast, to crown the nuptial board.
When war has thunder'd with its loudest storms,
Death thou hast seen in all her ghastly forms:
In duel met her on the listed ground,
When hand to hand they wound return for wound;
But never have the eyes astonish'd view'd
So vile a deed, so dire a scene of blood.
E'en in the flow of joy, when now the bowl
Glows in our veins, and opens every soul,
We groan, we faint; with blood the doom is dyed.
And o'er the pavement floats the dreadful tide--
Her breast all gore, with lamentable cries,
The bleeding innocent Cassandra dies!
Then though pale death froze cold in every vein,
My sword I strive to wield, but strive in vain;
Nor did my traitress wife these eyelids close,
Or decently in death my limbs compose.
O woman, woman, when to ill thy mind
Is bent, all hell contains no fouler fiend:
And such was mine! who basely plunged her sword
Through the fond bosom where she reign'd adored!
Alas! I hoped the toils of war o'ercome,
To meet soft quiet and repose at home;
Delusive hope! O wife, thy deeds disgrace
The perjured sex, and blacken all the race;
And should posterity one virtuous find,
Name Clytemnestra, they will curse the kind.'

"Oh injured shade (I cried) what mighty woes
To thy imperial race from woman rose!
By woman here thou tread'st this mournful strand,
And Greece by woman lies a desert land.'

"'Warn'd by my ills beware, (the shade replies,)
Nor trust the sex that is so rarely wise;
When earnest to explore thy secret breast,
Unfold some trifle, but conceal the rest.
But in thy consort cease to fear a foe,
For thee she feels sincerity of woe;
When Troy first bled beneath the Grecian arms,
She shone unrivall'd with a blaze of charms;
Thy infant son her fragrant bosom press'd,
Hung at her knee, or wanton'd at her breast;
But now the years a numerous train have ran;
The blooming boy is ripen'd into man;
Thy eyes shall see him burn with noble fire,
The sire shall bless his son, the son his sire;
But my Orestes never met these eyes,
Without one look the murder'd father dies;
Then from a wretched friend this wisdom learn,
E'en to thy queen disguised, unknown, return;
For since of womankind so few are just,
Think all are false, nor e'en the faithful trust.

"'But, say, resides my son in royal port,
In rich Orchomenos, or Sparta's court?
Or say in Pyle? for yet he views the light,
Nor glides a phantom through the realms of night.'

"Then I: 'Thy suit is vain, nor can I say
If yet he breathes in realms of cheerful day;
Or pale or wan beholds these nether skies;
Truth I revere; for wisdom never lies.'

"Thus in a tide of tears our sorrows flow,
And add new horror to the realms of woe;
Till side by side along the dreary coast
Advanced Achilles' and Patroclus' ghost,
A friendly pair! near these the Pylian stray'd,
And towering Ajax, an illustrious shade!
War was his joy, and pleased with loud alarms,
None but Pelides brighter shone in arms.

"Through the thick gloom his friend Achilles knew,
And as he speaks the tears descend in dew.

"'Comest thou alive to view the Stygian bounds,
Where the wan spectres walk eternal rounds;
Nor fear'st the dark and dismal waste to tread,
Throng'd with pale ghosts, familiar with the dead?'

"To whom with sighs: 'I pass these dreadful gates
To seek the Theban, and consult the Fates;
For still, distress'd, I rove from coast to coast,
Lost to my friends, and to my country lost.
But sure the eye of Time beholds no name
So bless'd as thine in all the rolls of fame;
Alive we hail'd thee with our guardian gods,
And dead thou rulest a king in these abodes.'

"'Talk not of ruling in this dolorous gloom,
Nor think vain words (he cried) can ease my doom.
Rather I'd choose laboriously to bear
A weight of woes, and breathe the vital air,
A slave to some poor hind that toils for bread,
Than reign the sceptred monarch of the dead.
But say, if in my steps my son proceeds,
And emulates his godlike father's deeds?
If at the clash of arms, and shout of foes,
Swells his bold heart, his bosom nobly glows?
Say if my sire, the reverend Peleus, reigns,
Great in his Phthia, and his throne maintains;
Or, weak and old, my youthful arm demands,
To fix the sceptre steadfast in his hands?
O might the lamp of life rekindled burn,
And death release me from the silent urn!
This arm, that thunder'd o'er the Phrygian plain,
And swell'd the ground with mountains of the slain,
Should vindicate my injured father's fame,
Crush the proud rebel, and assert his claim.'

"'Illustrious shade (I cried), of Peleus' fates
No circumstance the voice of Fame relates:
But hear with pleased attention the renown,
The wars and wisdom of thy gallant son.
With me from Scyros to the field of fame
Radiant in arms the blooming hero came.
When Greece assembled all her hundred states,
To ripen counsels, and decide debates,
Heavens! how he charm'd us with a flow of sense,
And won the heart with manly eloquence!
He first was seen of all the peers to rise,
The third in wisdom, where they all were wise!
But when, to try the fortune of the day,
Host moved toward host in terrible array,
Before the van, impatient for the fight,
With martial port he strode, and stern delight:
Heaps strew'd on heaps beneath his falchion groan'd,
And monuments of dead deform'd the ground.
The time would fail should I in order tell
What foes were vanquish'd, and what numbers fell:
How, lost through love, Eurypylus was slain,
And round him bled his bold Cetaean train.
To Troy no hero came of nobler line,
Or if of nobler, Memnon, it was thine.

"When Ilion in the horse received her doom,
And unseen armies ambush'd in its womb,
Greece gave her latent warriors to my care,
'Twas mine on Troy to pour the imprison'd war:
Then when the boldest bosom beat with fear,
When the stern eyes of heroes dropp'd a tear,
Fierce in his look his ardent valour glow'd,
Flush'd in his cheek, or sallied in his blood;
Indignant in the dark recess he stands,
Pants for the battle, and the war demands:
His voice breathed death, and with a martial air
He grasp'd his sword, and shook his glittering spear.
And when the gods our arms with conquest crown'd,
When Troy's proud bulwarks smoked upon the ground,
Greece, to reward her soldier's gallant toils,
Heap'd high his navy with unnumber'd spoils.

"Thus great in glory, from the din of war
Safe he return'd, without one hostile scar;
Though spears in iron tempests rain'd around,
Yet innocent they play'd, and guiltless of a wound.'

"While yet I spoke, the shade with transport glow'd,
Rose in his majesty, and nobler trod;
With haughty stalk he sought the distant glades
Of warrior kings, and join'd the illustrious shades.

"Now without number ghost by ghost arose,
All wailing with unutterable woes.
Alone, apart, in discontented mood,
A gloomy shade the sullen Ajax stood;
For ever sad, with proud disdain he pined,
And the lost arms for ever stung his mind;
Though to the contest Thetis gave the laws,
And Pallas, by the Trojans, judged the cause.
O why was I victorious in the strife?
O dear bought honour with so brave a life!
With him the strength of war, the soldier's pride,
Our second hope to great Achilles, died!
Touch'd at the sight from tears I scarce refrain,
And tender sorrow thrills in every vein;
Pensive and sad I stand, at length accost
With accents mild the inexorable ghost:
'Still burns thy rage? and can brave souls resent
E'en after death? Relent, great shade, relent!
Perish those arms which by the gods' decree
Accursed our army with the loss of thee!
With thee we fall; Greece wept thy hapless fates,
And shook astonish'd through her hundred states;
Not more, when great Achilles press'd the ground,
And breathed his manly spirit through the wound.
O deem thy fall not owed to man's decree,
Jove hated Greece, and punish'd Greece in thee!
Turn then; oh peaceful turn, thy wrath control,
And calm the raging tempest of thy soul.'

"While yet I speak, the shade disdains to stay,
In silence turns, and sullen stalks away.

"Touch'd at his sour retreat, through deepest night,
Through hell's black bounds I had pursued his flight,
And forced the stubborn spectre to reply;
But wondrous visions drew my curious eye.
High on a throne, tremendous to behold,
Stern Minos waves a mace of burnish'd gold;
Around ten thousand thousand spectres stand
Through the wide dome of Dis, a trembling band
Still as they plead, the fatal lots he rolls,
Absolves the just, and dooms the guilty souls.

"The huge Orion, of portentous size,
Swift through the gloom a giant-hunter flies:
A ponderous mace of brass with direful sway
Aloft he whirls, to crush the savage prey!
Stern beasts in trains that by his truncheon fell,
Now grisly forms, shoot o'er the lawns of hell.

"There Tityus large and long, in fetters bound,
O'erspreads nine acres of infernal ground;
Two ravenous vultures, furious for their food,
Scream o'er the fiend, and riot in his blood,
Incessant gore the liver in his breast,
The immortal liver grows, and gives the immortal feast.
For as o'er Panope's enamell'd plains
Latona journey'd to the Pythian fanes,
With haughty love the audacious monster strove
To force the goddess, and to rival Jove.

"There Tantalus along the Stygian bounds
Pours out deep groans (with groans all hell resounds);
E'en in the circling floods refreshment craves,
And pines with thirst amidst a sea of waves;
When to the water he his lip applies,
Back from his lip the treacherous water flies.
Above, beneath, around his hapless head,
Trees of all kinds delicious fruitage spread;
There figs, sky-dyed, a purple hue disclose,
Green looks the olive, the pomegranate glows.
There dangling pears exalting scents unfold.
And yellow apples ripen into gold;
The fruit he strives to seize; but blasts arise,
Toss it on high, and whirl it to the skies.

"I turn'd my eye, and as I turn'd survey'd
A mournful vision! the Sisyphian shade;
With many a weary step, and many a groan,
Up the high hill he heaves a huge round stone;
The huge round stone, resulting with a bound,
Thunders impetuous down, and smokes along the ground.
Again the restless orb his toil renews,
Dust mounts in clouds, and sweat descends in dews.

"Now I the strength of Hercules behold,
A towering spectre of gigantic mould,
A shadowy form! for high in heaven's abodes
Himself resides, a god among the gods;
There in the bright assemblies of the skies.
He nectar quaffs, and Hebe crowns his joys.
Here hovering ghosts, like fowl, his shade surround,
And clang their pinions with terrific sound;
Gloomy as night he stands, in act to throw
The aerial arrow from the twanging bow.
Around his breast a wondrous zone is roll'd,
Where woodland monsters grin in fretted gold;
There sullen lions sternly seem to roar,
The bear to growl to foam the tusky boar;
There war and havoc and destruction stood,
And vengeful murder red with human blood.
Thus terribly adorned the figures shine,
Inimitably wrought with skill divine.
The mighty good advanced with awful look,
And, turning his grim visage, sternly spoke:

"'O exercise in grief! by arts refined;
O taught to bear the wrongs of base mankind!
Such, such was I! Still toss'd from care to care,
While in your world I drew the vital air!
E'en I, who from the Lord of Thunders rose,
Bore toils and dangers, and a weight of woes;
To a base monarch still a slave confined,
(The hardest bondage to a generous mind!)
Down to these worlds I trod the dismal way,
And dragg'd the three-mouth'd dog to upper day
E'en hell I conquer'd, through the friendly aid
Of Maia's offspring, and the martial maid.

"Thus he, nor deign'd for our reply to stay,
But, turning, stalk'd with giant-strides away.

"Curious to view the kings of ancient days,
The mighty dead that live in endless praise,
Resolved I stand; and haply had survey'd
The godlike Theseus, and Pirithous' shade;
But swarms of spectres rose from deepest hell,
With bloodless visage, and with hideous yell.
They scream, they shriek; and groans and dismal sounds
Stun my scared ears, and pierce hell's utmost bounds.
No more my heart the dismal din sustains,
And my cold blood hangs shivering in my veins;
Lest Gorgon, rising from the infernal lakes,
With horrors arm'd, and curls of hissing snakes,
Should fix me stiffen'd at the monstrous sight,
A stony image, in eternal night!
Straight from the direful coast to purer air
I speed my flight, and to my mates repair.
My mates ascend the ship; they strike their oars;
The mountains lessen, and retreat the shores;
Swift o'er the waves we fly; the freshening gales
Sing through the shrouds, and stretch the swelling sails."

"Thus o'er the rolling surge the vessel flies,
Till from the waves the AEaean hills arise.
Here the gay Morn resides in radiant bowers,
Here keeps here revels with the dancing Hours;
Here Phoebus, rising in the ethereal way,
Through heaven's bright portals pours the beamy day.
At once we fix our halsers on the land.
At once descend, and press the desert sand:
There, worn and wasted, lose our cares in sleep,
To the hoarse murmurs of the rolling deep.

"Soon as the morn restored the day, we paid
Sepulchral honours to Elpenor's shade.
Now by the axe the rushing forest bends,
And the huge pile along the shore ascends.
Around we stand, a melancholy train,
And a loud groan re-echoes from the main.
Fierce o'er the pyre, by fanning breezes spread,
The hungry flames devour the silent dead.
A rising tomb, the silent dead to grace,
Fast by the roarings of the main we place;
The rising tomb a lofty column bore,
And high above it rose the tapering oar.

"Meantime the goddess our return survey'd
From the pale ghosts and hell's tremendous shade.
Swift she descends: a train of nymphs divine
Bear the rich viands and the generous wine:
In act to speak the power of magic stands,
And graceful thus accosts the listening bands;

"'O sons of woe? decreed by adverse fates
Alive to pass through hell's eternal gates!
All, soon or late, are doom'd that path to tread;
More wretched you! twice number'd with the dead!
This day adjourn your cares, exalt your souls,
Indulge the taste, and drain the sparkling bowls;
And when the morn unveils her saffron ray,
Spread your broad sails, and plough the liquid way:
Lo, I this night, your faithful guide, explain
Your woes by land, your dangers on the main.'

"The goddess spoke. In feasts we waste the day,
Till Phoebus downward plunged his burning ray;
Then sable night ascends, and balmy rest
Seals every eye, and calms the troubled breast.
Then curious she commands me to relate
The dreadful scenes of Pluto's dreary state.
She sat in silence while the tale I tell,
The wondrous visions and the laws of hell.

"Then thus: 'The lot of man the gods dispose;
These ills are past: now hear thy future woes
O prince attend; some favouring power be kind,
And print the important story on thy mind!

"'Next, where the Sirens dwells, you plough the seas;
Their song is death, and makes destruction please.
Unblest the man, whom music wins to stay
Nigh the cursed shore and listen to the lay.
No more that wretch shall view the joys of life
His blooming offspring, or his beauteous wife!
In verdant meads they sport; and wide around
Lie human bones that whiten all the ground:
The ground polluted floats with human gore,
And human carnage taints the dreadful shore
Fly swift the dangerous coast: let every ear
Be stopp'd against the song! 'tis death to hear!
Firm to the mast with chains thyself be bound,
Nor trust thy virtue to the enchanting sound.
If, mad with transport, freedom thou demand,
Be every fetter strain'd, and added band to band.

"'These seas o'erpass'd, be wise! but I refrain
To mark distinct thy voyage o'er the main:
New horrors rise! let prudence be thy guide,
And guard thy various passage through the tide.

"'High o'er the main two rocks exalt their brow,'
The boiling billows thundering roll below;
Through the vast waves the dreadful wonders move,
Hence named Erratic by the gods above.
No bird of air, no dove of swiftest wing,
That bears ambrosia to the ethereal king,
Shuns the dire rocks: in vain she cuts the skies;
The dire rocks meet, and crush her as she flies:
Not the fleet bark, when prosperous breezes play,
Ploughs o'er that roaring surge its desperate way;
O'erwhelm'd it sinks: while round a smoke expires,
And the waves flashing seem to burn with fires.
Scarce the famed Argo pass'd these raging floods,
The sacred Argo, fill'd with demigods!
E'en she had sunk, but Jove's imperial bride
Wing'd her fleet sail, and push'd her o'er the tide.

"'High in the air the rock its summit shrouds
In brooding tempests, and in rolling clouds;
Loud storms around, and mists eternal rise,
Beat its bleak brow, and intercept the skies.
When all the broad expansion, bright with day,
Glows with the autumnal or the summer ray,
The summer and the autumn glow in vain,
The sky for ever lowers, for ever clouds remain.
Impervious to the step of man it stands,
Though borne by twenty feet, though arm'd with twenty hands;
Smooth as the polish of the mirror rise
The slippery sides, and shoot into the skies.
Full in the centre of this rock display'd,
A yawning cavern casts a dreadful shade:
Nor the fleet arrow from the twanging bow,
Sent with full force, could reach the depth below.
Wide to the west the horrid gulf extends,
And the dire passage down to hell descends.
O fly the dreadful sight! expand thy sails,
Ply the strong oar, and catch the nimble gales;
Here Scylla bellows from the dire abodes,
Tremendous pest, abhorr'd by man and gods!
Hideous her voice, and with less terrors roar
The whelps of lions in the midnight hour.
Twelve feet, deform'd and foul, the fiend dispreads;
Six horrid necks she rears, and six terrific heads;
Her jaws grin dreadful with three rows of teeth;
Jaggy they stand, the gaping den of death;
Her parts obscene the raging billows hide;
Her bosom terribly o'erlooks the tide.
When stung with hunger she embroils the flood,
The sea-dog and the dolphin are her food;
She makes the huge leviathan her prey,
And all the monsters of the watery way;
The swiftest racer of the azure plain
Here fills her sails, and spreads her oars in vain;
Fell Scylla rises, in her fury roars,
At once six mouths expands, at once six men devours.

"'Close by, a rock of less enormous height
Breaks the wild waves, and forms a dangerous strait;
Full on its crown a fig's green branches rise,
And shoot a leafy forest to the skies;
Beneath, Charybdis holds her boisterous reign
'Midst roaring whirlpools, and absorbs the main;
Thrice in her gulfs the boiling seas subside,
Thrice in dire thunders she refunds the tide.
Oh, if thy vessel plough the direful waves,
When seas retreating roar within her caves,
Ye perish all! though he who rules the main
Lends his strong aid, his aid he lends in vain.
Ah, shun the horrid gulf! by Scylla fly.
'Tis better six to lose, than all to die.'

"I then: 'O nymph propitious to my prayer,
Goddess divine, my guardian power, declare,
Is the foul fiend from human vengeance freed?
Or, if I rise in arms, can Scylla bleed?'

"Then she: 'O worn by toils, O broke in fight,
Still are new toils and war thy dire delight?
Will martial flames for ever fire thy mind,
And never, never be to Heaven resign'd?
How vain thy efforts to avenge the wrong!
Deathless the pest! impenetrably strong!
Furious and fell, tremendous to behold!
E'en with a look she withers all the bold!
She mocks the weak attempts of human might;
Oh, fly her rage! thy conquest is thy flight.
If but to seize thy arms thou make delay,
Again thy fury vindicates her prey;
Her six mouths yawn, and six are snatch'd away.
From her foul wound Crataeis gave to air
This dreadful pest! To her direct thy prayer,
To curb the monster in her dire abodes,
And guard thee through the tumult of the floods.
Thence to Trinacria's shore you bend your way,
Where graze thy herds, illustrious source of day!
Seven herds, seven flocks enrich the sacred plains,
Each herd, each flock full fifty heads contains;
The wondrous kind a length of age survey,
By breed increase not, nor by death decay.
Two sister goddesses possess the plain,
The constant guardian of the woolly train;
Lampetie fair, and Phaethusa young,
From Phoebus and the bright Neaea sprung;
Here, watchful o'er the flocks, in shady bowers
And flowery meads, they waste the joyous hours.
Rob not the gods! and so propitious gales
Attend thy voyage, and impel thy sails;
But if thy impious hands the flocks destroy,
The gods, the gods avenge it, and ye die!
'Tis thine alone (thy friends and navy lost)
Through tedious toils to view thy native coast.'

She ceased: and now arose the morning ray;
Swift to her dome the goddess held her way.
Then to my mates I measured back the plain,
Climb'd the tall bark, and rush'd into the main;
Then, bending to the stroke, their oars they drew
To their broad breasts, and swift the galley flew.
Up sprung a brisker breeze; with freshening gales
The friendly goddess stretch'd the swelling sails;
We drop our oars; at ease the pilot guides;
The vessel light along the level glides.
When, rising sad and slow, with pensive look,
Thus to the melancholy train I spoke:

"'O friends, oh ever partners of my woes,
Attend while I what Heaven foredooms disclose.
Hear all! Fate hangs o'er all; on you it lies
To live or perish! to be safe, be wise!

"'In flowery meads the sportive Sirens play,
Touch the soft lyre, and tune the vocal lay;
Me, me alone, with fetters firmly bound,
The gods allow to hear the dangerous sound.
Hear and obey; if freedom I demand,
Be every fetter strain'd, be added band to band.'

"While yet I speak the winged galley flies,
And lo! the Siren shores like mists arise.
Sunk were at once the winds; the air above,
And waves below, at once forgot to move;
Some demon calm'd the air and smooth'd the deep,
Hush'd the loud winds, and charm'd the waves to sleep.
Now every sail we furl, each oar we ply;
Lash'd by the stroke, the frothy waters fly.
The ductile wax with busy hands I mould,
And cleft in fragments, and the fragments roll'd;
The aerial region now grew warm with day,
The wax dissolved beneath the burning ray;
Then every ear I barr'd against the strain,
And from access of frenzy lock'd the brain.
Now round the masts my mates the fetters roll'd,
And bound me limb by limb with fold on fold.
Then bending to the stroke, the active train
Plunge all at once their oars, and cleave the main.

"While to the shore the rapid vessel flies,
Our swift approach the Siren choir descries;
Celestial music warbles from their tongue,
And thus the sweet deluders tune the song:

"'Oh stay, O pride of Greece! Ulysses, stay!
Oh cease thy course, and listen to our lay!
Blest is the man ordain'd our voice to hear,
The song instructs the soul, and charms the ear.
Approach! thy soul shall into raptures rise!
Approach! and learn new wisdom from the wise!
We know whate'er the kings of mighty name
Achieved at Ilion in the field of fame;
Whate'er beneath the sun's bright journey lies.
Oh stay, and learn new wisdom from the wise!'

"Thus the sweet charmers warbled o'er the main;
My soul takes wing to meet the heavenly strain;
I give the sign, and struggle to be free;
Swift row my mates, and shoot along the sea;
New chains they add, and rapid urge the way,
Till, dying off, the distant sounds decay;
Then scudding swiftly from the dangerous ground,
The deafen'd ear unlock'd, the chains unbound.

"Now all at once tremendous scenes unfold;
Thunder'd the deeps, the smoky billows roll'd!
Tumultuous waves embroil the bellowing flood,
All trembling, deafen'd, and aghast we stood!
No more the vessel plough'd the dreadful wave,
Fear seized the mighty, and unnerved the brave;
Each dropp'd his oar; but swift from man to man
With looks serene I turn'd, and thus began:
'O friends! O often tried in adverse storms!
With ills familiar in more dreadful forms!
Deep in the dire Cyclopean den you lay,
Yet safe return'd--Ulysses led the way.
Learn courage hence, and in my care confide;
Lo! still the same Ulysses is your guide.
Attend my words! your oars incessant ply;
Strain every nerve, and bid the vessel fly.
If from yon jostling rocks and wavy war
Jove safety grants, he grants it to your care.
And thou, whose guiding hand directs our way,
Pilot, attentive listen and obey!
Bear wide thy course, nor plough those angry waves
Where rolls yon smoke, yon tumbling ocean raves;
Steer by the higher rock; lest whirl'd around
We sink, beneath the circling eddy drown'd.'
While yet I speak, at once their oars they seize,
Stretch to the stroke, and brush the working seas.
Cautious the name of Scylla I suppress'd;
That dreadful sound had chill'd the boldest breast.

"Meantime, forgetful of the voice divine,
All dreadful bright my limbs in armour shine;
High on the deck I take my dangerous stand,
Two glittering javelins lighten in my hand;
Prepared to whirl the whizzing spear I stay,
Till the fell fiend arise to seize her prey.
Around the dungeon, studious to behold
The hideous pest, my labouring eyes I roll'd;
In vain! the dismal dungeon, dark as night,
Veils the dire monster, and confounds the sight.

"Now through the rocks, appall'd with deep dismay,
We bend our course, and stem the desperate way;
Dire Scylla there a scene of horror forms,
And here Charybdis fills the deep with storms.
When the tide rushes from her rumbling caves,
The rough rock roars, tumultuous boil the waves;
They toss, they foam, a wild confusion raise,
Like waters bubbling o'er the fiery blaze;
Eternal mists obscure the aerial plain,
And high above the rock she spouts the main;
When in her gulfs the rushing sea subsides,
She drains the ocean with the refluent tides;
The rock re-bellows with a thundering sound;
Deep, wondrous deep, below appears the ground.

"Struck with despair, with trembling hearts we view'd
The yawning dungeon, and the tumbling flood;
When lo! fierce Scylla stoop'd to seize her prey,
Stretch'd her dire jaws, and swept six men away.
Chiefs of renown! loud-echoing shrieks arise;
I turn, and view them quivering in the skies;
They call, and aid with outstretch'd arms implore;
In vain they call! those arms are stretch'd no more.
As from some rock that overhangs the flood
The silent fisher casts the insidious food,
With fraudful care he waits the finny prize,
And sudden lifts it quivering to the skies:
So the foul monster lifts her prey on high,
So pant the wretches struggling in the sky;
In the wide dungeon she devours her food,
And the flesh trembles while she churns the blood.
Worn as I am with griefs, with care decay'd,
Never, I never scene so dire survey'd!
My shivering blood, congeal'd, forgot to flow;
Aghast I stood, a monument of woe!

"Now from the rocks the rapid vessel flies,
And the hoarse din like distant thunder dies;
To Sol's bright isle our voyage we pursue,
And now the glittering mountains rise to view.
There, sacred to the radiant god of day,
Graze the fair herds, the flocks promiscuous stray:
Then suddenly was heard along the main
To low the ox, to blest the woolly train.
Straight to my anxious thoughts the sound convey'd
The words of Circe and the Theban shade;
Warn'd by their awful voice these shores to shun,
With cautious fears oppress'd I thus begun:

"'O friends! O ever exorcised in care!
Hear Heaven's commands, and reverence what ye hear!
To fly these shores the prescient Theban shade
And Circe warn! Oh be their voice obey'd
Some mighty woe relentless Heaven forebodes:
Fly these dire regions, and revere the gods!'

"While yet I spoke, a sudden sorrow ran
Through every breast, and spread from man to man,
Till wrathful thus Eurylochus began:

"'O cruel thou! some Fury sure has steel'd
That stubborn soul, by toil untaught to yield!
From sleep debarr'd, we sink from woes to woes:
And cruel' enviest thou a short repose?
Still must we restless rove, new seas explore,
The sun descending, and so near the shore?
And lo! the night begins her groomy reign,
And doubles all the terrors of the main:
Oft in the dead of night loud winds rise,
Lash the wild surge, and bluster in the skies.
Oh, should the fierce south-west his rage display,
And toss with rising storms the watery way,
Though gods descend from heaven's aerial plain
To lend us aid, the gods descend in vain.
Then while the night displays her awful shade,
Sweet time of slumber! be the night obey'
Haste ye to land! and when the morning ray
Sheds her bright beam, pursue the destined way.'
A sudden joy in every bosom rose:
So will'd some demon, minister of woes!

"To whom with grief: 'O swift to be undone!
Constrain'd I act what wisdom bids me shun.
But yonder herbs and yonder flocks forbear;
Attest the heavens, and call the gods to hear:
Content, an innocent repast display,
By Circe given, and fly the dangerous prey.'

'Thus I: and while to shore the vessel flies,
With hands uplifted they attest the skies:
Then, where a fountain's gurgling waters play,
They rush to land, and end in feasts the day:
They feed; they quaff; and now (their hunger fled)
Sigh for their friends devour'd, and mourn the dead;
Nor cease the tears' till each in slumber shares
A sweet forgetfulness of human cares.
Now far the night advanced her gloomy reign,
And setting stars roll'd down the azure plain:
When at the voice of Jove wild whirlwinds rise,
And clouds and double darkness veil the skies;
The moon, the stars, the bright ethereal host
Seem as extinct, and all their splendours lost:
The furious tempest roars with dreadful sound:
Air thunders, rolls the ocean, groans the ground.
All night it raged: when morning rose to land
We haul'd our bark, and moor'd it on the strand,
Where in a beauteous grotto's cool recess
Dance the green Nerolds of the neighbouring seas.

"There while the wild winds whistled o'er the main,
Thus careful I address'd the listening train:

"'O friends, be wise! nor dare the flocks destroy
Of these fair pastures: if ye touch, ye die.
Warn'd by the high command of Heaven, be awed:
Holy the flocks, and dreadful is the god!
That god who spreads the radiant beams of light,
And views wide earth and heaven's unmeasured height.'

"And now the moon had run her monthly round,
The south-east blustering with a dreadful sound:
Unhurt the beeves, untouch'd the woolly train,
Low through the grove, or touch the flowery plain:
Then fail'd our food: then fish we make our prey,
Or fowl that screaming haunt the watery way.
Till now from sea or flood no succour found,
Famine and meagre want besieged us round.
Pensive and pale from grove to grove I stray'd,
From the loud storms to find a sylvan shade;
There o'er my hands the living wave I pour;
And Heaven and Heaven's immortal thrones implore,
To calm the roarings of the stormy main,
And guide me peaceful to my realms again.
Then o'er my eyes the gods soft slumbers shed,
While thus Eurylochus arising said:

"'O friends, a thousand ways frail mortals lead
To the cold tomb, and dreadful all to tread;
But dreadful most, when by a slow decay
Pale hunger wastes the manly strength away.
Why cease ye then to implore the powers above,
And offer hecatombs to thundering Jove?
Why seize ye not yon beeves, and fleecy prey?
Arise unanimous; arise and slay!
And if the gods ordain a safe return,
To Phoebus shrines shall rise, and altars burn.
But should the powers that o'er mankind preside
Decree to plunge us in the whelming tide,
Better to rush at once to shades below
Than linger life away, and nourish woe.'

"Thus he: the beeves around securely stray,
When swift to ruin they invade the prey;
They seize, they kill!--but for the rite divine.
The barley fail'd, and for libations wine.
Swift from the oak they strip the shady pride;
And verdant leaves the flowery cake supplied.

"With prayer they now address the ethereal train,
Slay the selected beeves, and flay the slain;
The thighs, with fat involved, divide with art,
Strew'd o'er with morsels cut from every part.
Water, instead of wine, is brought in urns,
And pour'd profanely as the victim burns.
The thighs thus offer'd, and the entrails dress'd,
They roast the fragments, and prepare the feast.

"'Twas then soft slumber fled my troubled brain;
Back to the bark I speed along the main.
When lo! an odour from the feast exhales,
Spreads o'er the coast and scents the tainted gales;
A chilly fear congeal'd my vital blood,
And thus, obtesting Heaven, I mourn'd aloud;

"'O sire of men and gods, immortal Jove!
O all ye blissful powers that reign above!
Why were my cares beguiled in short repose?
O fatal slumber, paid with lasting woes!
A deed so dreadful all the gods alarms,
Vengeance is on the wing, and Heaven in arms!'

"Meantime Lampetie mounts the aerial way,
And kindles into rage the god of day;

"'Vengeance, ye powers (he cries), and then whose hand
Aims the red bolt, and hurls the writhen brand!
Slain are those herds which I with pride survey,
When through the ports of heaven I pour the day,
Or deep in ocean plunge the burning ray.
Vengeance, ye gods! or I the skies forego,
And bear the lamp of heaven to shades below.'

"To whom the thundering Power: 'O source of day
Whose radiant lamp adorns the azure way,
Still may thy beams through heaven's bright portal rise,
The joy of earth, the glory of the skies:
Lo! my red arm I bare, my thunders guide,
To dash the offenders in the whelming tide.'

"To fair Calypso, from the bright abodes,
Hermes convey'd these counsels of the gods.

"Meantime from man to man my tongue exclaims,
My wrath is kindled, and my soul in flames.
In vain! I view perform'd the direful deed,
Beeves, slain in heaps, along the ocean bleed.

"Now heaven gave signs of wrath: along the ground
Crept the raw hides, and with a bellowing sound
Roar'd the dead limbs; the burning entrails groan'd.
Six guilty days my wretched mates employ
In impious feasting, and unhallowed joy;
The seventh arose, and now the sire of gods
Rein'd the rough storms; and calm'd the tossing floods:
With speed the bark we climb; the spacious sails.
Loosed from the yards invite the impelling gales.
Past sight of shore, along the surge we bound,
And all above is sky, and ocean all around;
When lo! a murky cloud the thunderer forms
Full o'er our heads, and blackens heaven with storms.
Night dwells o'er all the deep: and now outflies
The gloomy west, and whistles in the skies.
The mountain-billows roar! the furious blast
Howls o'er the shroud, and rends it from the mast:
The mast gives way, and, crackling as it bends,
Tears up the deck; then all at once descends:
The pilot by the tumbling ruin slain,
Dash'd from the helm, falls headlong in the main.
Then Jove in anger bids his thunders roll,
And forky lightnings flash from pole to pole:
Fierce at our heads his deadly bolt he aims,
Red with uncommon wrath, and wrapp'd in flames:
Full on the bark it fell; now high, now low,
Toss'd and retoss'd, it reel'd beneath the blow;
At once into the main the crew it shook:
Sulphurous odours rose, and smouldering smoke.
Like fowl that haunt the floods, they sink, they rise,
Now lost, now seen, with shrieks and dreadful cries;
And strive to gain the bark, but Jove denies.
Firm at the helm I stand, when fierce the main
Rush'd with dire noise, and dash'd the sides in twain;
Again impetuous drove the furious blast,
Snapp'd the strong helm, and bore to sea the mast.
Firm to the mast with cords the helm I bind,
And ride aloft, to Providence resign'd,
Through tumbling billows and a war of wind.
"Now sunk the west, and now a southern breeze,
More dreadful than the tempest lash'd the seas;
For on the rocks it bore where Scylla raves,
And dire Charybdis rolls her thundering waves.
All night I drove; and at the dawn of day,
Fast by the rocks beheld the desperate way;
Just when the sea within her gulfs subsides,
And in the roaring whirlpools rush the tides,
Swift from the float I vaulted with a bound,
The lofty fig-tree seized, and clung around;
So to the beam the bat tenacious clings,
And pendent round it clasps his leather wings.
High in the air the tree its boughs display'd,
And o'er the dungeon cast a dreadful shade;
All unsustain'd between the wave and sky,
Beneath my feet the whirling billows fly.
What time the judge forsakes the noisy bar
To take repast, and stills the wordy war,
Charybdis, rumbling from her inmost caves,
The mast refunded on her refluent waves.
Swift from the tree, the floating mass to gain,
Sudden I dropp'd amidst the flashing main;
Once more undaunted on the ruin rode,
And oar'd with labouring arms along the flood.
Unseen I pass'd by Scylla's dire abodes.
So Jove decreed (dread sire of men and gods).
Then nine long days I plow'd the calmer seas,
Heaved by the surge, and wafted by the breeze.
Weary and wet the Ogygian shores I gain,
When the tenth sun descended to the main.
There, in Calypso's ever-fragrant bowers,
Refresh'd I lay, and joy beguiled the hours.
"My following fates to thee, O king, are known,
And the bright partner of thy royal throne.
Enough: in misery can words avail?
And what so tedious as a twice-told tale?"

He ceased; but left so pleasing on their ear
His voice, that listening still they seem'd to hear.
A pause of silence hush'd the shady rooms:
The grateful conference then the king resumes:

"Whatever toils the great Ulysses pass'd,
Beneath this happy roof they end at last;
No longer now from shore to shore to roam,
Smooth seas and gentle winds invite him home.
But hear me, princes! whom these walls inclose,
For whom my chanter sings: and goblet flows
With wine unmix'd (an honour due to age,
To cheer the grave, and warm the poet's rage);
Though labour'd gold and many a dazzling vest
Lie heap'd already for our godlike guest;
Without new treasures let him not remove,
Large, and expressive of the public love:
Each peer a tripod, each a vase bestow,
A general tribute, which the state shall owe."

This sentence pleased: then all their steps address'd
To separate mansions, and retired to rest.

Now did the rosy-finger'd morn arise,
And shed her sacred light along the skies.
Down to the haven and the ships in haste
They bore the treasures, and in safety placed.
The king himself the vases ranged with care;
Then bade his followers to the feast prepare.
A victim ox beneath the sacred hand
Of great Alcinous falls, and stains the sand.
To Jove the Eternal (power above all powers!
Who wings the winds, and darkens heaven with showers)
The flames ascend: till evening they prolong
The rites, more sacred made by heavenly song;
For in the midst, with public honours graced,
Thy lyre divine, Demodocus! was placed.
All, but Ulysses, heard with fix'd delight;
He sate, and eyed the sun, and wish'd the night;
Slow seem'd the sun to move, the hours to roll,
His native home deep-imaged in his soul.
As the tired ploughman, spent with stubborn toil,
Whose oxen long have torn the furrow'd soil,
Sees with delight the sun's declining ray,
When home with feeble knees he bends his way
To late repast (the day's hard labour done);
So to Ulysses welcome set the sun;
Then instant to Alcinous and the rest
(The Scherian states) he turn'd, and thus address'd:

"O thou, the first in merit and command!
And you the peers and princes of the land!
May every joy be yours! nor this the least,
When due libation shall have crown'd the feast,
Safe to my home to send your happy guest.
Complete are now the bounties you have given,
Be all those bounties but confirm'd by Heaven!
So may I find, when all my wanderings cease,
My consort blameless, and my friends in peace.
On you be every bliss; and every day,
In home-felt joys, delighted roll away;
Yourselves, your wives, your long-descending race,
May every god enrich with every grace!
Sure fix'd on virtue may your nation stand,
And public evil never touch the land!"

His words well weigh'd, the general voice approved
Benign, and instant his dismission moved,
The monarch to Pontonus gave the sign.
To fill the goblet high with rosy wine;
"Great Jove the Father first (he cried) implore;'
Then send the stranger to his native shore."

The luscious wine the obedient herald brought;
Around the mansion flow'd the purple draught;
Each from his seat to each immortal pours,
Whom glory circles in the Olympian bowers
Ulysses sole with air majestic stands,
The bowl presenting to Arete's hands;
Then thus: "O queen, farewell! be still possess'd
Of dear remembrance, blessing still and bless'd!
Till age and death shall gently call thee hence,
(Sure fate of every mortal excellence!)
Farewell! and joys successive ever spring
To thee, to thine, the people, and the king!"

Thus he: then parting prints the sandy shore
To the fair port: a herald march'd before,
Sent by Alcinous; of Arete's train
Three chosen maids attend him to the main;
This does a tunic and white vest convey,
A various casket that, of rich inlay,
And bread and wine the third. The cheerful mates
Safe in the hollow poop dispose the cates;
Upon the deck soft painted robes they spread
With linen cover'd, for the hero's bed.
He climbed the lofty stern; then gently press'd
The swelling couch, and lay composed to rest.

Now placed in order, the Phaeacian train
Their cables loose, and launch into the main;
At once they bend, and strike their equal oars,
And leave the sinking hills and lessening shores.
While on the deck the chief in silence lies,
And pleasing slumbers steal upon his eyes.
As fiery coursers in the rapid race
Urged by fierce drivers through the dusty space,
Toss their high heads, and scour along the plain,
So mounts the bounding vessel o'er the main.
Back to the stern the parted billows flow,
And the black ocean foams and roars below.

Thus with spread sails the winged galley flies;
Less swift an eagle cuts the liquid skies;
Divine Ulysses was her sacred load,
A man, in wisdom equal to a god!
Much danger, long and mighty toils he bore,
In storms by sea, and combats on the shore;
All which soft sleep now banish'd from his breast,
Wrapp'd in a pleasing, deep, and death-like rest.

But when the morning-star with early ray
Flamed in the front of heaven, and promised day;
Like distant clouds the mariner descries
Fair Ithaca's emerging hills arise.
Far from the town a spacious port appears,
Sacred to Phorcys' power, whose name it bears;
Two craggy rocks projecting to the main,
The roaring wind's tempestuous rage restrain;
Within the waves in softer murmurs glide,
And ships secure without their halsers ride.
High at the head a branching olive grows,
And crowns the pointed cliffs with shady boughs.
Beneath, a gloomy grotto's cool recess
Delights the Nereids of the neighbouring seas,
Where bowls and urns were form'd of living stone,
And massy beams in native marble shone,
On which the labours of the nymphs were roll'd,
Their webs divine of purple mix'd with gold.
Within the cave the clustering bees attend
Their waxen works, or from the roof depend.
Perpetual waters o'er the pavement glide;
Two marble doors unfold on either side;
Sacred the south, by which the gods descend;
But mortals enter at the northern end.
Thither they bent, and haul'd their ship to land
(The crooked keel divides the yellow sand).
Ulysses sleeping on his couch they bore,
And gently placed him on the rocky shore.
His treasures next, Alcinous' gifts, they laid
In the wild olive's unfrequented shade,
Secure from theft; then launch'd the bark again,
Resumed their oars, and measured back the main,
Nor yet forgot old Ocean's dread supreme,
The vengeance vow'd for eyeless Polypheme.
Before the throne of mighty Jove lie stood,
And sought the secret counsels of the god.

"Shall then no more, O sire of gods! be mine
The rights and honours of a power divine?
Scorn'd e'en by man, and (oh severe disgrace!)
By soft Phaeacians, my degenerate race!
Against yon destined head in vain I swore,
And menaced vengeance, ere he reach'd his shore;
To reach his natal shore was thy decree;
Mild I obey'd, for who shall war with thee?
Behold him landed, careless and asleep,
From all the eluded dangers of the deep;
Lo where he lies, amidst a shining store
Of brass, rich garments, and refulgent ore;
And bears triumphant to his native isle
A prize more worth than Ilion's noble spoil."

To whom the Father of the immortal powers,
Who swells the clouds, and gladdens earth with showers,
"Can mighty Neptune thus of man complain?
Neptune, tremendous o'er the boundless main!
Revered and awful e'en in heaven's abodes,
Ancient and great! a god above the gods!
If that low race offend thy power divine
(Weak, daring creatures!) is not vengeance thine?
Go, then, the guilty at thy will chastise."
He said. The shaker of the earth replies:

"This then, I doom: to fix the gallant ship,
A mark of vengeance on the sable deep;
To warn the thoughtless, self-confiding train,
No more unlicensed thus to brave the main.
Full in their port a Shady hill shall rise,
If such thy will."--" We will it (Jove replies).
E'en when with transport blackening all the strand,
The swarming people hail their ship to land,
Fix her for ever, a memorial stone:
Still let her seem to sail, and seem alone.
The trembling crowds shall see the sudden shade
Of whelming mountains overhang their head!"

With that the god whose earthquakes rock the ground
Fierce to Phaeacia cross'd the vast profound.
Swift as a swallow sweeps the liquid way,
The winged pinnace shot along the sea.
The god arrests her with a sudden stroke,
And roots her down an everlasting rock.
Aghast the Scherians stand in deep surprise;
All press to speak, all question with their eyes.
What hands unseen the rapid bark restrain!
And yet it swims, or seems to swim, the main!
Thus they, unconscious of the deed divine;
Till great Alcinous, rising, own'd the sign.

"Behold the long predestined day I (he cries;)
O certain faith of ancient prophecies
These ears have heard my royal sire disclose
A dreadful story, big with future woes;
How, moved with wrath, that careless we convey
Promiscuous every guest to every bay,
Stern Neptune raged; and how by his command
Firm rooted in the surge a ship should stand
(A monument of wrath); and mound on mound
Should hide our walls, or whelm beneath the ground.

"The Fates have follow'd as declared the seer.
Be humbled, nations! and your monarch hear.
No more unlicensed brave the deeps, no more
With every stranger pass from shore to shore;
On angry Neptune now for mercy call;
To his high name let twelve black oxen fall.
So may the god reverse his purposed will,
Nor o'er our city hang the dreadful hill."

The monarch spoke: they trembled and obey'd,
Forth on the sands the victim oxen led;
The gathered tribes before the altars stand,
And chiefs and rulers, a majestic band.
The king of ocean all the tribes implore;
The blazing altars redden all the shore.

Meanwhile Ulysses in his country lay,
Released from sleep, and round him might survey
The solitary shore and rolling sea.
Yet had his mind through tedious absence lost
The dear resemblance of his native coast;
Besides, Minerva, to secure her care,
Diffused around a veil of thickened air;
For so the gods ordain'd to keep unseen
His royal person from his friends and queen;
Till the proud suitors for their crimes afford
An ample vengeance to their injured lord.

Now all the land another prospect bore,
Another port appear'd, another shore.
And long-continued ways, and winding floods,
And unknown mountains, crown'd with unknown woods
Pensive and slow, with sudden grief oppress'd,
The king arose, and beat his careful breast,
Cast a long look o'er all the coast and main,
And sought, around, his native realm in vain;
Then with erected eyes stood fix'd in woe,
And as he spoke, the tears began to flow.

"Ye gods (he cried), upon what barren coast,
In what new region, is Ulysses toss'd?
Possess'd by wild barbarians, fierce in arms?
Or men whose bosom tender pity warms?
Where shall this treasure now in safely be?
And whither, whither its sad owner fly?
Ah, why did I Alcinous' grace implore?
Ah, why forsake Phaeacia's happy shore?
Some juster prince perhaps had entertain'd,
And safe restored me to my native land.
Is this the promised, long-expected coast,
And this the faith Phaeacia's rulers boast?
O righteous gods! of all the great, how few
Are just to Heaven, and to their promise true!
But he, the power to whose all-seeing eyes
The deeds of men appear without disguise,
'Tis his alone to avenge the wrongs I bear;
For still the oppress'd are his peculiar care.
To count these presents, and from thence to prove,
Their faith is mine; the rest belongs to Jove."

Then on the sands he ranged his wealthy store,
The gold, the vests, the tripods number'd o'er:
All these he found, but still in error lost,
Disconsolate he wanders on the coast,
Sighs for his country, and laments again
To the deaf rocks, and hoarse-resounding main.
When lo! the guardian goddess of the wise,
Celestial Pallas, stood before his eyes;
In show a youthful swain, of form divine,
Who seem'd descended from some princely line.
A graceful robe her slender body dress'd;
Around her shoulders flew the waving vest;
Her decent hand a shining javelin bore,
And painted sandals on her feet she wore.
To whom the king: "Whoe'er of human race
Thou art, that wanderest in this desert place,
With joy to thee, as to some god I bend,
To thee my treasures and myself commend.
O tell a wretch in exile doom'd to stray,
What air I breathe, what country I survey?
The fruitful continent's extremest bound,
Or some fair isle which Neptune's arms surround?

"From what far clime (said she) remote from fame
Arrivest thou here, a stranger to our name?
Thou seest an island, not to those unknown
Whose hills are brighten'd by the rising sun,
Nor those that placed beneath his utmost reign
Behold him sinking in the western main.
The rugged soil allows no level space
For flying chariots, or the rapid race;
Yet, not ungrateful to the peasant's pain,
Suffices fulness to the swelling grain;
The loaded trees their various fruits produce,
And clustering grapes afford a generous juice;
Woods crown our mountains, and in every grove
The bounding goats and frisking heifers rove;
Soft rains and kindly dews refresh the field,
And rising springs eternal verdure yield.
E'en to those shores is Ithaca renown'd,
Where Troy's majestic ruins strew the ground."

At this, the chief with transport was possess'd;
His panting heart exulted in his breast;
Yet, well dissembling his untimely joys,
And veiling truth in plausible disguise,
Thus, with an air sincere, in fiction bold,
His ready tale the inventive hero told:

"Oft have I heard in Crete this island's name;
For 'twas from Crete, my native soil, I came,
Self-banished thence.  I sail'd before the wind,
And left my children and my friends behind.
From fierce Idomeneus' revenge I flew,
Whose son, the swift Orsilochus, I slew
(With brutal force he seized my Trojan prey,
Due to the toils of many a bloody day).
Unseen I 'scaped, and favour'd by the night,
In a Phoenician vessel took my flight,
For Pyle or Elis bound; but tempests toss'd
And raging billows drove us on your coast.
In dead of night an unknown port we gain'd;
Spent with fatigue, and slept secure on land.
But ere the rosy morn renew'd the day,
While in the embrace of pleasing sleep I lay,
Sudden, invited by auspicious gales,
They land my goods, and hoist their flying sails.
Abandon'd here, my fortune I deplore
A hapless exile on a foreign shore,"

Thus while he spoke, the blue-eyed maid began
With pleasing smiles to view the godlike man;
Then changed her form: and now, divinely bright,
Jove's heavenly daughter stood confess'd to sight;
Like a fair virgin in her beauty's bloom,
Skill'd in the illustrious labours of the loom.

"O still the same Ulysses! (she rejoin'd,)
In useful craft successfully refined!
Artful in speech, in action, and in mind!
Sufficed it not, that, thy long labours pass'd,
Secure thou seest thy native shore at last?
But this to me? who, like thyself, excel
In arts of counsel and dissembling well;
To me? whose wit exceeds the powers divine,
No less than mortals are surpass'd by thine.
Know'st thou not me; who made thy life my care,
Through ten years' wandering, and through ten years' war;
Who taught thee arts, Alcinous to persuade,
To raise his wonder, and engage his aid;
And now appear, thy treasures to protect,
Conceal thy person, thy designs direct,
And tell what more thou must from Fate expect;
Domestic woes far heavier to be borne!
The pride of fools, and slaves' insulting scorn?
But thou be silent, nor reveal thy state;
Yield to the force of unresisted Fate,
And bear unmoved the wrongs of base mankind,
The last, and hardest, conquest of the mind."

"Goddess of wisdom! (Ithacus replies,)
He who discerns thee must be truly wise,
So seldom view'd and ever in disguise!
When the bold Argives led their warring powers,
Against proud Ilion's well-defended towers,
Ulysses was thy care, celestial maid!
Graced with thy sight, and favoured with thy aid.
But when the Trojan piles in ashes lay,
And bound for Greece we plough'd the watery way;
Our fleet dispersed, and driven from coast to coast,
Thy sacred presence from that hour I lost;
Till I beheld thy radiant form once more,
And heard thy counsels on Phaeacia's shore.
But, by the almighty author of thy race,
Tell me, oh tell, is this my native place?
For much I fear, long tracts of land and sea
Divide this coast from distant Ithaca;
The sweet delusion kindly you impose,
To soothe my hopes, and mitigate my woes."

Thus he. The blue-eyed goddess thus replies;
"How prone to doubt, how cautious are the wise!
Who, versed in fortune, fear the flattering show,
And taste not half the bliss the gods bestow.
The more shall Pallas aid thy just desires,
And guard the wisdom which herself inspires.
Others long absent from their native place,
Straight seek their home, and fly with eager pace
To their wives' arms, and children's dear embrace.
Not thus Ulysses; he decrees to prove
His subjects' faith, and queen's suspected love;
Who mourn'd her lord twice ten revolving years,
And wastes the days in grief, the nights in tears.
But Pallas knew (thy friends and navy lost)
Once more 'twas given thee to behold thy coast;
Yet how could I with adverse Fate engage,
And mighty Neptune's unrelenting rage?
Now lift thy longing eyes, while I restore
The pleasing prospect of thy native shore.
Bebold the port of Phorcys! fenced around
With rocky mountains, and with olives crown'd,
Behold the gloomy grot! whose cool recess
Delights the Nereids of the neighbouring seas;
Whose now-neglected altars in thy reign
Blush'd with the blood of sheep and oxen slain,
Behold! where Neritus the clouds divides,
And shakes the waving forests on his sides."

So spake the goddess; and the prospect clear'd,
The mists dispersed, and all the coast appeared.
The king with joy confess'd his place of birth,
And on his knees salutes his mother earth;
Then, with his suppliant hands upheld in air,
Thus to the sea-green sisters sends his prayer;

"All hail! ye virgin daughters of the main!
Ye streams, beyond my hopes, beheld again!
To you once more your own Ulysses bows;
Attend his transports, and receive his vows!
If Jove prolong my days, and Pallas crown
The growing virtues of my youthful son,
To you shall rites divine be ever paid,
And grateful offerings on your altars laid."

Thus then Minerva: "From that anxious breast
Dismiss those cares, and leave to heaven the rest.
Our task be now thy treasured stores to save,
Deep in the close recesses of the cave;
Then future means consult." She spoke, and trod
The shady grot, that brighten'd with the god.
The closest caverns of the grot she sought;
The gold, the brass, the robes, Ulysses brought;
These in the secret gloom the chief disposed;
The entrance with a rock the goddess closed.

Now, seated in the olive's sacred shade,
Confer the hero and the martial maid.
The goddess of the azure eyes began:
"Son of Laertes! much-experienced man!
The suitor-train thy earliest care demand,
Of that luxurious race to rid the land;
Three years thy house their lawless rule has seen,
And proud addresses to the matchless queen.
But she thy absence mourns from day to day,
And inly bleeds, and silent wastes away;
Elusive of the bridal hour, she gives
Fond hopes to all, and all with hopes deceives."

To this Ulysses: "O celestial maid!
Praised be thy counsel, and thy timely aid;
Else had I seen my native walls in vain,
Like great Atrides, just restored and slain.
Vouchsafe the means of vengeance to debate,
And plan with all thy arts the scene of fate.
Then, then be present, and my soul inspire,
As when we wrapp'd Troy's heaven-built walls in fire.
Though leagued against me hundred heroes stand.
Hundreds shall fall, if Pallas aid my hand."

She answer'd: "In the dreadful day of fight
Know, I am with thee, strong in all my might.
If thou but equal to thyself be found,
What gasping numbers then shall press the ground!
What human victims stain the feastful floor!
How wide the pavements float with guilty gore!
It fits thee now to wear a dark disguise,
And secret walk unknown to mortal eyes.
For this, my hand shall wither every grace,
And every elegance of form and face;
O'er thy smooth skin a bark of wrinkles spread,
Turn hoar the auburn honours of thy head;
Disfigure every limb with coarse attire,
And in thy eyes extinguish all the fire;
Add all the wants and the decays of life;
Estrange thee from thy own; thy son, thy wife;
From the loathed object every sight shall turn,
And the blind suitors their destruction scorn.

"Go first the master of thy herds to find,
True to his charge, a loyal swain and kind;
For thee he sighs; and to the loyal heir
And chaste Penelope extends his care.
At the Coracian rock he now resides,
Where Arethusa's sable water glides;
The sable water and the copious mast
Swell the fat herd; luxuriant, large repast!
With him rest peaceful in the rural cell,
And all you ask his faithful tongue shall tell.
Me into other realms my cares convey,
To Sparta, still with female beauty gay;
For know, to Sparta thy loved offspring came,
To learn thy fortunes from the voice of Fame."

At this the father, with a father's care:
"Must he too suffer? he, O goddess! bear
Of wanderings and of woes a wretched share?
Through the wild ocean plough the dangerous way,
And leave his fortunes and his house a prey?
Why would'st not thou, O all-enlighten'd mind!
Inform him certain, and protect him, kind?"

To whom Minerva: "Be thy soul at rest;
And know, whatever heaven ordains is best.
To fame I sent him, to acquire renown;
To other regions is his virtue known;
Secure he sits, near great Atrides placed;
With friendships strengthen'd, and with honours graced,
But lo! an ambush waits his passage o'er;
Fierce foes insidious intercept the shore;
In vain; far sooner all the murderous brood
This injured land shall fatten with their blood."

She spake, then touch'd him with her powerful wand:
The skin shrunk up, and wither'd at her hand;
A swift old age o'er all his members spread;
A sudden frost was sprinkled on his head;
Nor longer in the heavy eye-ball shined
The glance divine, forth-beaming from the mind.
His robe, which spots indelible besmear,
In rags dishonest flutters with the air:
A stag's torn hide is lapp'd around his reins;
A rugged staff his trembling hand sustains;
And at his side a wretched scrip was hung,
Wide-patch'd, and knotted to a twisted thong.
So looked the chief, so moved: to mortal eyes
Object uncouth! a man of miseries!
While Pallas, cleaving the wild fields of air,
To Sparta flies, Telemachus her care.

But he, deep-musing, o'er the mountains stray'd
Through mazy thickets of the woodland shade,
And cavern'd ways, the shaggy coast along
With cliffs and nodding forests overhung.
Eumaeus at his sylvan lodge he sought,
A faithful servant, and without a fault.
Ulysses found him busied as he sate
Before the threshold of his rustic gate;
Around the mansion in a circle shone
A rural portico of rugged stone
(In absence of his lord with honest toil
His own industrious hands had raised the pile).
The wall was stone from neighbouring quarries borne,
Encircled with a fence of native thorn,
And strong with pales, by many a weary stroke
Of stubborn labour hewn from heart of oak:
Frequent and thick. Within the space were rear'd
Twelve ample cells, the lodgments of his herd.
Full fifty pregnant females each contain'd;
The males without (a smaller race) remain'd;
Doom'd to supply the suitors' wasteful feast,
A stock by daily luxury decreased;
Now scarce four hundred left. These to defend,
Four savage dogs, a watchful guard, attend.
Here sat Eumaeus, and his cares applied
To form strong buskins of well-season'd hide.
Of four assistants who his labour share,
Three now were absent on the rural care;
The fourth drove victims to a suitor train:
But he, of ancient faith, a simple swain,
Sigh'd, while he furnish'd the luxurious board,
And wearied Heaven with wishes for his lord.

Soon as Ulysses near the inclosure drew,
With open mouths the furious mastiffs flew:
Down sat the sage, and cautious to withstand,
Let fall the offensive truncheon from his hand.
Sudden, the master runs; aloud he calls;
And from his hasty hand the leather falls:
With showers of stones he drives then far away:
The scattering dogs around at distance bay.

"Unhappy stranger! (thus the faithful swain
Began with accent gracious and humane),
What sorrow had been mine, if at my gate
Thy reverend age had met a shameful fate!
Enough of woes already have I known;
Enough my master's sorrows and my own.
While here (ungrateful task!) his herds I feed,
Ordain'd for lawless rioters to bleed!
Perhaps, supported at another's board!
Far from his country roams my hapless lord;
Or sigh'd in exile forth his latest breath,
Now cover'd with the eternal shade of death!

"But enter this my homely roof, and see
Our woods not void of hospitality.
Then tell me whence thou art, and what the share
Of woes and wanderings thou wert born to bear."

He said, and, seconding the kind request,
With friendly step precedes his unknown guest.
A shaggy goat's soft hide beneath him spread,
And with fresh rushes heap'd an ample bed;
Jove touch'd the hero's tender soul, to find
So just reception from a heart so kind:
And "Oh, ye gods! with all your blessings grace
(He thus broke forth) this friend of human race!"

The swain replied: "It never was our guise
To slight the poor, or aught humane despise:
For Jove unfold our hospitable door,
'Tis Jove that sends the stranger and the poor,
Little, alas! is all the good I can
A man oppress'd, dependent, yet a man:
Accept such treatment as a swain affords,
Slave to the insolence of youthful lords!
Far hence is by unequal gods removed
That man of bounties, loving and beloved!
To whom whate'er his slave enjoys is owed,
And more, had Fate allow'd, had been bestow'd:
But Fate condemn'd him to a foreign shore;
Much have I sorrow'd, but my Master more.
Now cold he lies, to death's embrace resign'd:
Ah, perish Helen! perish all her kind!
For whose cursed cause, in Agamemnon's name,
He trod so fatally the paths of fame."

His vest succinct then girding round his waist,
Forth rush'd the swain with hospitable haste.
Straight to the lodgments of his herd he run,
Where the fat porkers slept beneath the sun;
Of two, his cutlass launch'd the spouting blood;
These quarter'd, singed, and fix'd on forks of wood,
All hasty on the hissing coals he threw;
And smoking, back the tasteful viands drew.
Broachers and all then an the board display'd
The ready meal, before Ulysses laid
With flour imbrown'd; next mingled wine yet new,
And luscious as the bees' nectareous dew:
Then sate, companion of the friendly feast,
With open look; and thus bespoke his guest:
"Take with free welcome what our hands prepare,
Such food as falls to simple servants' share;
The best our lords consume; those thoughtless peers,
Rich without bounty, guilty without fears;
Yet sure the gods their impious acts detest,
And honour justice and the righteous breast.
Pirates and conquerors of harden'd mind,
The foes of peace, and scourges of mankind,
To whom offending men are made a prey
When Jove in vengeance gives a land away;
E'en these, when of their ill-got spoils possess'd,
Find sure tormentors in the guilty breast:
Some voice of God close whispering from within,
'Wretch! this is villainy, and this is sin.'
But these, no doubt, some oracle explore,
That tells, the great Ulysses is no more.
Hence springs their confidence, and from our sighs
Their rapine strengthens, and their riots rise:
Constant as Jove the night and day bestows,
Bleeds a whole hecatomb, a vintage flows.
None match'd this hero's wealth, of all who reign
O'er the fair islands of the neighbouring main.
Nor all the monarchs whose far-dreaded sway
The wide-extended continents obey:
First, on the main land, of Ulysses' breed
Twelve herds, twelve flocks, on ocean's margin feed;
As many stalls for shaggy goats are rear'd;
As many lodgments for the tusky herd;
Two foreign keepers guard: and here are seen
Twelve herds of goats that graze our utmost green;
To native pastors is their charge assign'd,
And mine the care to feed the bristly kind;
Each day the fattest bleeds of either herd,
All to the suitors' wasteful board preferr'd."
Thus he, benevolent: his unknown guest
With hunger keen devours the savoury feast;
While schemes of vengeance ripen in his breast.
Silent and thoughtful while the board he eyed,
Eumaeus pours on high the purple tide;
The king with smiling looks his joy express'd,
And thus the kind inviting host address'd:

"Say now, what man is he, the man deplored,
So rich, so potent, whom you style your lord?
Late with such affluence and possessions bless'd,
And now in honour's glorious bed at rest.
Whoever was the warrior, he must be
To fame no stranger, nor perhaps to me:
Who (so the gods and so the Fates ordain'd)
Have wander'd many a sea, and many a land."

"Small is the faith the prince and queen ascribe
(Replied Eumaeus) to the wandering tribe.
For needy strangers still to flattery fly,
And want too oft betrays the tongue to lie.
Each vagrant traveller, that touches here,
Deludes with fallacies the royal ear,
To dear remembrance makes his image rise,
And calls the springing sorrows from her eyes.
Such thou mayst be. But he whose name you crave
Moulders in earth, or welters on the wave,
Or food for fish or dogs his relics lie,
Or torn by birds are scatter'd through the sky.
So perish'd he: and left (for ever lost)
Much woe to all, but sure to me the most.
So mild a master never shall I find;
Less dear the parents whom I left behind,
Less soft my mother, less my father kind.
Not with such transport would my eyes run o'er,
Again to hail them in their native shore,
As loved Ulysses once more to embrace,
Restored and breathing in his natal place.
That name for ever dread, yet ever dear,
E'en in his absence I pronounce with fear:
In my respect, he bears a prince's part;
But lives a very brother in my heart."

Thus spoke the faithful swain, and thus rejoin'd
The master of his grief, the man of patient mind:
"Ulysses, friend! shall view his old abodes
(Distrustful as thou art), nor doubt the gods.
Nor speak I rashly, but with faith averr'd,
And what I speak attesting Heaven has heard.
If so, a cloak and vesture be my meed:
Till his return no title shall I plead,
Though certain be my news, and great my need.
Whom want itself can force untruths to tell,
My soul detests him as the gates of hell.

"Thou first be witness, hospitable Jove!
And every god inspiring social love!
And witness every household power that waits,
Guard of these fires, and angel of these gates!
Ere the next moon increase or this decay,
His ancient realms Ulysses shall survey,
In blood and dust each proud oppressor mourn,
And the lost glories of his house return."

"Nor shall that meed be thine, nor ever more
Shall loved Ulysses hail this happy shore.
(Replied Eumaeus): to the present hour
Now turn thy thought, and joys within our power.
From sad reflection let my soul repose;
The name of him awakes a thousand woes.
But guard him, gods! and to these arms restore!
Not his true consort can desire him more;
Not old Laertes, broken with despair:
Not young Telemachus, his blooming heir.
Alas, Telemachus! my sorrows flow
Afresh for thee, my second cause of woe!
Like some fair plant set by a heavenly hand,
He grew, he flourish'd, and he bless'd the land;
In all the youth his father's image shined,
Bright in his person, brighter in his mind.
What man, or god, deceived his better sense,
Far on the swelling seas to wander hence?
To distant Pylos hapless is he gone,
To seek his father's fate and find his own!
For traitors wait his way, with dire design
To end at once the great Arcesian line.
But let us leave him to their wills above;
The fates of men are in the hand of Jove.
And now, my venerable guest! declare
Your name, your parents, and your native air:
Sincere from whence begun, your course relate,
And to what ship I owe the friendly freight?"

Thus he: and thus (with prompt invention bold)
The cautious chief his ready story told.

"On dark reserve what better can prevail,
Or from the fluent tongue produce the tale,
Than when two friends, alone, in peaceful place
Confer, and wines and cates the table grace;
But most, the kind inviter's cheerful face?
Thus might we sit, with social goblets crown'd,
Till the whole circle of the year goes round:
Not the whole circle of the year would close
My long narration of a life of woes.
But such was Heaven's high will! Know then, I came
From sacred Crete, and from a sire of fame:
Castor Hylacides (that name he bore),
Beloved and honour'd in his native shore;
Bless'd in his riches, in his children more.
Sprung of a handmaid, from a bought embrace,
I shared his kindness with his lawful race:
But when that fate, which all must undergo,
From earth removed him to the shades below,
The large domain his greedy sons divide,
And each was portion'd as the lots decide.
Little, alas! was left my wretched share,
Except a house, a covert from the air:
But what by niggard fortune was denied,
A willing widow's copious wealth supplied.
My valour was my plea, a gallant mind,
That, true to honour, never lagg'd behind
(The sex is ever to a soldier kind).
Now wasting years my former strength confound,
And added woes have bow'd me to the ground;
Yet by the stubble you may guess the grain,
And mark the ruins of no vulgar man.
Me, Pallas gave to lead the martial storm,
And the fair ranks of battle to deform;
Me, Mars inspired to turn the foe to flight,
And tempt the secret ambush of the night.
Let ghastly Death in all his forms appear,
I saw him not, it was not mine to fear.
Before the rest I raised my ready steel,
The first I met, he yielded, or he fell.
But works of peace my soul disdain'd to bear,
The rural labour, or domestic care.
To raise the mast, the missile dart to wing,
And send swift arrows from the bounding string,
Were arts the gods made grateful to my mind;
Those gods, who turn (to various ends design'd)
The various thoughts and talents of mankind.
Before the Grecians touch'd the Trojan plain,
Nine times commander or by land or main,
In foreign fields I spread my glory far,
Great in the praise, rich in the spoils of war;
Thence charged with riches, as increased in fame,
To Crete return'd, an honourable name.
But when great Jove that direful war decreed,
Which roused all Greece, and made the mighty bleed;
Our states myself and Idomen employ
To lead their fleets, and carry death to Troy.
Nine years we warr'd; the tenth saw Ilion fall;
Homeward we sail'd, but heaven dispersed us all.
One only month my wife enjoy'd my stay;
So will'd the god who gives and takes away.
Nine ships I mann'd, equipp'd with ready stores,
Intent to voyage to the Aegyptian shores;
In feast and sacrifice my chosen train
Six days consum'd; the seventh we plough'd the main.
Crete's ample fields diminish to our eye;
Before the Boreal blast the vessels fly;
Safe through the level seas we sweep our way;
The steersman governs, and the ships obey.
The fifth fair morn we stem the Aegyptian tide,
And tilting o'er the bay the vessels ride:
To anchor there my fellows I command,
And spies commission to explore the land.
But, sway'd by lust of gain, and headlong will,
The coasts they ravage, and the natives kill.
The spreading clamour to their city flies,
And horse and foot in mingled tumult rise.
The reddening dawn reveals the circling fields,
Horrid with bristly spears, and glancing shields.
Jove thunder'd on their side. Our guilty head
We turn'd to flight; the gathering vengeance spread
On all parts round, and heaps on heaps lie dead.
I then explored my thought, what course to prove
(And sure the thought was dictated by Jove):
Oh, had he left me to that happier doom,
And saved a life of miseries to come!
The radiant helmet from my brows unlaced,
And low on earth my shield and javelin cast,
I meet the monarch with a suppliant's face,
Approach his chariot, and his knees embrace,
He heard, he saved, he placed me at his side;
My state he pitied, and my tears he dried,
Restrain'd the rage the vengeful foe express'd,
And turn'd the deadly weapons from my breast.
Pious! to guard the hospitable rite,
And fearing Jove, whom mercy's works delight.

"In Aegypt thus with peace and plenty bless'd,
I lived (and happy still have lived) a guest.
On seven bright years successive blessings wait;
The next changed all the colour of my fate.
A false Phoenician, of insiduous mind,
Versed in vile arts, and foe to humankind,
With semblance fair invites me to his home;
I seized the proffer (ever fond to roam):
Domestic in his faithless roof I stay'd,
Till the swift sun his annual circle made.
To Libya then he mediates the way;
With guileful art a stranger to betray,
And sell to bondage in a foreign land:
Much doubting, yet compell'd I quit the strand,
Through the mid seas the nimble pinnace sails,
Aloof from Crete, before the northern gales:
But when remote her chalky cliffs we lost,
And far from ken of any other coast,
When all was wild expanse of sea and air,
Then doom'd high Jove due vengeance to prepare.
He hung a night of horrors o'er their head
(The shaded ocean blacken'd as it spread):
He launch'd the fiery bolt: from pole to pole
Broad burst the lightnings, deep the thunders roll;
In giddy rounds the whirling ship is toss'd,
An all in clouds of smothering sulphur lost.
As from a hanging rock's tremendous height,
The sable crows with intercepted flight
Drop endlong; scarr'd, and black with sulphurous hue,
So from the deck are hurl'd the ghastly crew.
Such end the wicked found! but Jove's intent
Was yet to save the oppress'd and innocent.
Placed on the mast (the last resource of life)
With winds and waves I held unequal strife:
For nine long days the billows tilting o'er,
The tenth soft wafts me to Thesprotia's shore.
The monarch's son a shipwreck'd wretch relieved,
The sire with hospitable rites received,
And in his palace like a brother placed,
With gifts of price and gorgeous garments graced
While here I sojourn'd, oft I heard the fame
How late Ulysses to the country came.
How loved, how honour'd in this court he stay'd,
And here his whole collected treasure laid;
I saw myself the vast unnumber'd store
Of steel elaborate, and refulgent ore,
And brass high heap'd amidst the regal dome;
Immense supplies for ages yet to come!
Meantime he voyaged to explore the will
Of Jove, on high Dodona's holy hill,
What means might best his safe return avail,
To come in pomp, or bear a secret sail?
Full oft has Phidon, whilst he pour'd the wine,
Attesting solemn all the powers divine,
That soon Ulysses would return, declared
The sailors waiting, and the ships prepared.
But first the king dismiss'd me from his shores,
For fair Dulichium crown'd with fruitful stores;
To good Acastus' friendly care consign'd:
But other counsels pleased the sailors' mind:
New frauds were plotted by the faithless train,
And misery demands me once again.
Soon as remote from shore they plough the wave,
With ready hands they rush to seize their slave;
Then with these tatter'd rags they wrapp'd me round
(Stripp'd of my own), and to the vessel bound.
At eve, at Ithaca's delightful land
The ship arriv'd: forth issuing on the sand,
They sought repast; while to the unhappy kind,
The pitying gods themselves my chains unbind.
Soft I descended, to the sea applied
My naked breast, and shot along the tide.
Soon pass'd beyond their sight, I left the flood,
And took the spreading shelter of the wood.
Their prize escaped the faithless pirates mourn'd;
But deem'd inquiry vain, and to their ships return'd.
Screen'd by protecting gods from hostile eyes,
They led me to a good man and a wise,
To live beneath thy hospitable care,
And wait the woes Heaven dooms me yet to bear."

"Unhappy guest! whose sorrows touch my mind!
(Thus good Eumaeus with a sigh rejoin'd,)
For real sufferings since I grieve sincere,
Check not with fallacies the springing tear:
Nor turn the passion into groundless joy
For him whom Heaven has destined to destroy.
Oh! had he perish'd on some well-fought day,
Or in his friend's embraces died away!
That grateful Greece with streaming eyes might raise
Historic marbles to record his praise;
His praise, eternal on the faithful stone,
Had with transmissive honours graced his son.
Now, snatch'd by harpies to the dreary coast,
Sunk is the hero, and his glory lost!
While pensive in this solitary den,
Far from gay cities and the ways of men,
I linger life; nor to the court repair,
But when my constant queen commands my care;
Or when, to taste her hospitable board,
Some guest arrives, with rumours of her lord;
And these indulge their want, and those their woe,
And here the tears and there the goblets flow.
By many such have I been warn'd; but chief
By one Aetolian robb'd of all belief,
Whose hap it was to this our roof to roam,
For murder banish'd from his native home.
He swore, Ulysses on the coast of Crete
Stay'd but a season to refit his fleet;
A few revolving months should waft him o'er,
Fraught with bold warriors, and a boundless store
O thou! whom age has taught to understand,
And Heaven has guided with a favouring hand!
On god or mortal to obtrude a lie
Forbear, and dread to flatter as to die.
Nor for such ends my house and heart are free,
But dear respect to Jove, and charity."

"And why, O swain of unbelieving mind!
(Thus quick replied the wisest of mankind)
Doubt you my oath? yet more my faith to try,
A solemn compact let us ratify,
And witness every power that rules the sky!
If here Ulysses from his labours rest,
Be then my prize a tunic and a vest;
And where my hopes invite me, straight transport
In safety to Dulichium's friendly court.
But if he greets not thy desiring eye,
Hurl me from yon dread precipice on high:
The due reward of fraud and perjury."

"Doubtless, O guest! great laud and praise were mine
(Replied the swain, for spotless faith divine),
If after social rites and gifts bestow'd,
I stain'd my hospitable hearth with blood.
How would the gods my righteous toils succeed,
And bless the hand that made a stranger bleed?
No more--the approaching hours of silent night
First claim refection, then to rest invite;
Beneath our humble cottage let us haste,
And here, unenvied, rural dainties taste."

Thus communed these; while to their lowly dome
The full-fed swine return'd with evening home;
Compell'd, reluctant, to their several sties,
With din obstreperous, and ungrateful cries.
Then to the slaves: "Now from the herd the best
Select in honour of our foreign guest:
With him let us the genial banquet share,
For great and many are the griefs we bear;
While those who from our labours heap their board
Blaspheme their feeder, and forget their lord."

Thus speaking, with despatchful hand he took
A weighty axe, and cleft the solid oak;
This on the earth he piled; a boar full fed,
Of five years' age, before the pile was led:
The swain, whom acts of piety delight,
Observant of the gods, begins the rite;
First shears the forehead of the bristly boar,
And suppliant stands, invoking every power
To speed Ulysses to his native shore.
A knotty stake then aiming at his head,
Down dropped he groaning, and the spirit fled.
The scorching flames climb round on every side;
Then the singed members they with skill divide;
On these, in rolls of fat involved with art,
The choicest morsels lay from every part.
Some in the flames bestrew'd with flour they threw;
Some cut in fragments from the forks they drew:
These while on several tables they dispose.
A priest himself the blameless rustic rose;
Expert the destined victim to dispart
In seven just portions, pure of hand and heart.
One sacred to the nymphs apart they lay:
Another to the winged sons of May;
The rural tribe in common share the rest,
The king the chine, the honour of the feast,
Who sate delighted at his servant's board;
The faithful servant joy'd his unknown lord.
"Oh be thou dear (Ulysses cried) to Jove,
As well thou claim'st a grateful stranger's love!"

"Be then thy thanks (the bounteous swain replied)
Enjoyment of the good the gods provide.
From God's own hand descend our joys and woes;
These he decrees, and he but suffers those:
All power is his, and whatsoe'er he wills,
The will itself, omnipotent, fulfils."
This said, the first-fruits to the gods he gave;
Then pour'd of offer'd wine the sable wave:
In great Ulysses' hand he placed the bowl,
He sate, and sweet refection cheer'd his soul.
The bread from canisters Mesaulius gave
(Eumaeus' proper treasure bought this slave,
And led from Taphos, to attend his board,
A servant added to his absent lord);
His task it was the wheaten loaves to lay,
And from the banquet take the bowls away.
And now the rage of hunger was repress'd,
And each betakes him to his couch to rest.

Now came the night, and darkness cover'd o'er
The face of things; the winds began to roar;
The driving storm the watery west-wind pours,
And Jove descends in deluges of showers.
Studious of rest and warmth, Ulysses lies,
Foreseeing from the first the storm would rise
In mere necessity of coat and cloak,
With artful preface to his host he spoke:
"Hear me, my friends! who this good banquet grace;
'Tis sweet to play the fool in time and place,
And wine can of their wits the wise beguile,
Make the sage frolic, and the serious smile,
The grave in merry measures frisk about,
And many a long-repented word bring out.
Since to be talkative I now commence,
Let wit cast off the sullen yoke of sense.
Once I was strong (would Heaven restore those days!)
And with my betters claim'd a share of praise.
Ulysses, Menelaus, led forth a band,
And join'd me with them ('twas their own command);
A deathful ambush for the foe to lay,
Beneath Troy walls by night we took our way:
There, clad in arms, along the marshes spread,
We made the osier-fringed bank our bed.
Full soon the inclemency of heaven I feel,
Nor had these shoulders covering, but of steel.
Sharp blew the north; snow whitening all the fields
Froze with the blast, and gathering glazed our shields.
There all but I, well fenced with cloak and vest,
Lay cover'd by their ample shields at rest.
Fool that I was! I left behind my own,
The skill of weather and of winds unknown,
And trusted to my coat and shield alone!
When now was wasted more than half the night,
And the stars faded at approaching light,
Sudden I jogg'd Ulysses, who was laid
Fast by my side, and shivering thus I said:

"'Here longer in this field I cannot lie;
The winter pinches, and with cold I die,
And die ashamed (O wisest of mankind),
The only fool who left his cloak behind.'

"He thought and answer'd: hardly waking yet,
Sprung in his mind a momentary wit
(That wit, which or in council or in fight,
Still met the emergence, and determined right).
'Hush thee (he cried, soft whispering in my ear),
Speak not a word, lest any Greek may hear'--
And then (supporting on his arm his head),
'Hear me, companions! (thus aloud he said:)
Methinks too distant from the fleet we lie:
E'en now a vision stood before my eye,
And sure the warning vision was from high:
Let from among us some swift courier rise,
Haste to the general, and demand supplies.'

"Up started Thoas straight, Andraemon's son,
Nimbly he rose, and cast his garment down!
Instant, the racer vanish'd off the ground;
That instant in his cloak I wrapp'd me round:
And safe I slept, till brightly-dawning shone
The morn conspicuous on her golden throne.

"Oh were my strength as then, as then my age!
Some friend would fence me from the winter's rage.
Yet, tatter'd as I look, I challenged then
The honours and the offices of men:
Some master, or some servant would allow
A cloak and vest--but I am nothing now!"

"Well hast thou spoke (rejoin'd the attentive swain):
Thy lips let fall no idle word or vain!
Nor garment shalt thou want, nor aught beside,
Meet for the wandering suppliant to provide.
But in the morning take thy clothes again,
For here one vest suffices every swain:
No change of garments to our hinds is known;
But when return'd, the good Ulysses' son
With better hand shall grace with fit attires
His guest, and send thee where thy soul desires."

The honest herdsman rose, as this he said,
And drew before the hearth the stranger's bed;
The fleecy spoils of sheep, a goat's rough hide
He spreads; and adds a mantle thick and wide;
With store to heap above him, and below,
And guard each quarter as the tempests blow.
There lay the king, and all the rest supine;
All, but the careful master of the swine:
Forth hasted he to tend his bristly care;
Well arm'd, and fenced against nocturnal air:
His weighty falchion o'er his shoulder tied:
His shaggy cloak a mountain goat supplied:
With his broad spear the dread of dogs and men,
He seeks his lodging in the rocky den.
There to the tusky herd he bends his way,
Where, screen'd from Boreas, high o'erarch'd they lay.

Now had Minerva reach'd those ample plains,
Famed for the dance, where Menelaus reigns:
Anxious she flies to great Ulysses' heir,
His instant voyage challenged all her care.
Beneath the royal portico display'd,
With Nestor's son Telemachus was laid:
In sleep profound the son of Nestor lies;
Not thine, Ulysses! Care unseal'd his eyes:
Restless he grieved, with various fears oppress'd,
And all thy fortunes roll'd within his breast.
When, "O Telemachus! (the goddess said)
Too long in vain, too widely hast thou stray'd,
Thus leaving careless thy paternal right
The robbers' prize, the prey to lawless might.
On fond pursuits neglectful while you roam,
E'en now the hand of rapine sacks the dome.
Hence to Atrides; and his leave implore
To launch thy vessel for thy natal shore;
Fly, whilst thy mother virtuous yet withstands
Her kindred's wishes, and her sire's commands;
Through both, Eurymachus pursues the dame,
And with the noblest gifts asserts his claim.
Hence, therefore, while thy stores thy own remain;
Thou know'st the practice of the female train,
Lost in the children of the present spouse,
They slight the pledges of their former vows;
Their love is always with the lover past;
Still the succeeding flame expels the last.
Let o'er thy house some chosen maid preside,
Till Heaven decrees to bless thee in a bride.
But now thy more attentive ears incline,
Observe the warnings of a power divine;
For thee their snares the suitor lords shall lay
In Samos' sands, or straits of Ithaca;
To seize thy life shall lurk the murderous band,
Ere yet thy footsteps press thy native land.
No!--sooner far their riot and their lust
All-covering earth shall bury deep in dust!
Then distant from the scatter'd islands steer,
Nor let the night retard thy full career;
Thy heavenly guardian shall instruct the gales
To smooth thy passage and supply thy sails:
And when at Ithaca thy labour ends,
Send to the town the vessel with thy friends;
But seek thou first the master of the swine
(For still to thee his loyal thoughts incline);
There pass the night: while he his course pursues
To bring Penelope the wish'd-for news,
That thou, safe sailing from the Pylian strand,
Art come to bless her in thy native land."
Thus spoke the goddess, and resumed her flight
To the pure regions of eternal light,
Meanwhile Pisistratus he gently shakes,
And with these words the slumbering youth awakes:

"Rise, son of Nestor; for the road prepare,
And join the harness'd coursers to the car."

"What cause (he cried) can justify our flight
To tempt the dangers of forbidding night?
Here wait we rather, till approaching day
Shall prompt our speed, and point the ready way.
Nor think of flight before the Spartan king
Shall bid farewell, and bounteous presents bring;
Gifts, which to distant ages safely stored,
The sacred act of friendship shall record."

Thus he. But when the dawn bestreak'd the east,
The king from Helen rose, and sought his guest.
As soon as his approach the hero knew,
The splendid mantle round him first he threw,
Then o'er his ample shoulders whirl'd the cloak,
Respectful met the monarch, and bespoke:

"Hail, great Atrides, favour'd of high Jove!
Let not thy friends in vain for licence move.
Swift let us measure back the watery way,
Nor check our speed, impatient of delay."

"If with desire so strong thy bosom glows,
Ill (said the king) should I thy wish oppose;
For oft in others freely I reprove
The ill-timed efforts of officious love;
Who love too much, hate in the like extreme,
And both the golden mean alike condemn.
Alike he thwarts the hospitable end,
Who drives the free, or stays the hasty friend:
True friendship's laws are by this rule express'd,
Welcome the coming, speed the parting guest.
Yet, stay, my friends, and in your chariot take
The noblest presents that our love can make;
Meantime commit we to our women's care
Some choice domestic viands to prepare;
The traveller, rising from the banquet gay,
Eludes the labours of the tedious way,
Then if a wider course shall rather please,
Through spacious Argos and the realms of Greece,
Atrides in his chariot shall attend;
Himself thy convoy to each royal friend.
No prince will let Ulysses' heir remove
Without some pledge, some monument of love:
These will the caldron, these the tripod give;
From those the well-pair'd mules we shall receive,
Or bowl emboss'd whose golden figures live."

To whom the youth, for prudence famed, replied:
"O monarch, care of heaven! thy people's pride!
No friend in Ithaca my place supplies,
No powerful hands are there, no watchful eyes:
My stores exposed and fenceless house demand
The speediest succour from my guardian hand;
Lest, in a search too anxious and too vain,
Of one lost joy, I lose what yet remain."

His purpose when the generous warrior heard,
He charged the household cates to be prepared.
Now with the dawn, from his adjoining home,
Was Boethoedes Eteoneus come;
Swift at the word he forms the rising blaze,
And o'er the coals the smoking fragments lays.
Meantime the king, his son, and Helen went
Where the rich wardrobe breathed a costly scent;
The king selected from the glittering rows
A bowl; the prince a silver beaker chose.
The beauteous queen revolved with careful eyes
Her various textures of unnumber'd dyes,
And chose the largest; with no vulgar art
Her own fair hands embroider'd every part;
Beneath the rest it lay divinely bright,
Like radiant Hesper o'er the gems of night,
Then with each gift they hasten'd to their guest,
And thus the king Ulysses' heir address'd:
"Since fix'd are thy resolves, may thundering Jove
With happiest omens thy desires approve!
This silver bowl, whose costly margins shine
Enchased with old, this valued gift be thine;
To me this present, of Vulcanian frame,
From Sidon's hospitable monarch came;
To thee we now consign the precious load,
The pride of kings, and labour of a god."

Then gave the cup, while Megapenthe brought
The silver vase with living sculpture wrought.
The beauteous queen, advancing next, display'd
The shining veil, and thus endearing said:

"Accept, dear youth, this monument of love,
Long since, in better days, by Helen wove:
Safe in thy mother's care the vesture lay,
To deck thy bride and grace thy nuptial day.
Meantime may'st thou with happiest speed regain
Thy stately palace, and thy wide domain."

She said, and gave the veil; with grateful look
The prince the variegated present took.
And now, when through the royal dome they pass'd,
High on a throne the king each stranger placed.
A golden ewer the attendant damsel brings,
Replete with water from the crystal springs;
With copious streams the shining vase supplies
A silver layer of capacious size.
They wash. The tables in fair order spread,
The glittering canisters are crown'd with bread;
Viands of various kinds allure the taste,
Of choicest sort and savour; rich repast!
Whilst Eteoneus portions out the shares
Atrides' son the purple draught prepares,
And now (each sated with the genial feast,
And the short rage of thirst and hunger ceased)
Ulysses' son, with his illustrious friend,
The horses join, the polish'd car ascend,
Along the court the fiery steeds rebound,
And the wide portal echoes to the sound.
The king precedes; a bowl with fragrant wine
(Libation destined to the powers divine)
His right hand held: before the steed he stands,
Then, mix'd with prayers, he utters these commands:

"Farewell, and prosper, youths! let Nestor know
What grateful thoughts still in this bosom glow,
For all the proofs of his paternal care,
Through the long dangers of the ten years' war."
"Ah! doubt not our report (the prince rejoin'd)
Of all the virtues of thy generous mind.
And oh! return'd might we Ulysses meet!
To him thy presents show, thy words repeat:
How will each speech his grateful wonder raise!
How will each gift indulge us in thy praise!"

Scarce ended thus the prince, when on the right
Advanced the bird of Jove: auspicious sight!
A milk-white fowl his clinching talons bore,
With care domestic pampered at the floor.
Peasants in vain with threatening cries pursue,
In solemn speed the bird majestic flew
Full dexter to the car; the prosperous sight
Fill'd every breast with wonder and delight.

But Nestor's son the cheerful silence broke,
And in these words the Spartan chief bespoke:
"Say if to us the gods these omens send,
Or fates peculiar to thyself portend?"

Whilst yet the monarch paused, with doubts oppress'd
The beauteous queen relieved his labouring breast:
"Hear me (she cried), to whom the gods have given
To read this sign, and mystic sense of heaven,
As thus the plumy sovereign of the air
Left on the mountain's brow his callow care,
And wander'd through the wide ethereal way
To pour his wrath on yon luxurious prey;
So shall thy godlike father, toss'd in vain
Through all the dangers of the boundless main,
Arrive (or if perchance already come)
From slaughter'd gluttons to release the dome."

"Oh! if this promised bliss by thundering Jove
(The prince replied) stand fix'd in fate above;
To thee, as to some god, I'll temples raise.
And crown thy altars with the costly blaze."

He said; and bending o'er his chariot, flung
Athwart the fiery steeds the smarting thong;
The bounding shafts upon the harness play,
Till night descending intercepts the way.
To Diocles at Pherae they repair,
Whose boasted sire was sacred Alpheus' heir;
With him all night the youthful stranger stay'd,
Nor found the hospitable rites unpaid,
But soon as morning from her orient bed
Had tinged the mountains with her earliest red,
They join'd the steeds, and on the chariot sprung,
The brazen portals in their passage rung.

To Pylos soon they came; when thus begun
To Nestor's heir Ulysses' godlike son:

"Let not Pisistratus in vain be press'd,
Nor unconsenting hear his friend's request;
His friend by long hereditary claim,
In toils his equal, and in years the same.
No farther from our vessel, I implore,
The courses drive; but lash them to the shore.
Too long thy father would his friend detain;
I dread his proffer'd kindness urged in vain."

The hero paused, and ponder'd this request,
While love and duty warr'd within his breast.
At length resolved, he turn'd his ready hand,
And lash'd his panting coursers to the strand.
There, while within the poop with care he stored
The regal presents of the Spartan lord,
"With speed begone (said he); call every mate,
Ere yet to Nestor I the tale relate:
'Tis true, the fervour of his generous heart
Brooks no repulse, nor couldst thou soon depart:
Himself will seek thee here, nor wilt thou find,
In words alone, the Pylian monarch kind.
But when, arrived, he thy return shall know
How will his breast with honest fury glow!"
This said, the sounding strokes his horses fire,
And soon he reached the palace of his sire.

"Now (cried Telemachus) with speedy care
Hoist every sail, and every oar prepare."
Swift as the word his willing mates obey,
And seize their seats, impatient for the sea.

Meantime the prince with sacrifice adores
Minerva, and her guardian aid implores;
When lo! a wretch ran breathless to the shore,
New from his crime; and reeking yet with gore.
A seer he was, from great Melampus sprung,
Melampus, who in Pylos flourish'd long,
Till, urged by wrongs, a foreign realm he chose,
Far from the hateful cause of all his woes.
Neleus his treasures one long year detains,
As long he groan'd in Philacus' chains:
Meantime, what anguish and what rage combined
For lovely Pero rack'd his labouring mind!
Yet 'scaped he death; and vengeful of his wrong
To Pylos drove the lowing herds along:
Then (Neleus vanquish'd, and consign'd the fair
To Bias' arms) he so sought a foreign air;
Argos the rich for his retreat he chose,
There form'd his empire; there his palace rose.
From him Antiphates and Mantius came:
The first begot Oicleus great in fame,
And he Amphiaraus, immortal name!
The people's saviour, and divinely wise,
Beloved by Jove, and him who gilds the skies;
Yet short his date of life! by female pride he dies.
From Mantius Clitus, whom Aurora's love
Snatch'd for his beauty to the thrones above;
And Polyphides, on whom Phoebus shone
With fullest rays, Amphiaraus now gone;
In Hyperesia's groves he made abode,
And taught mankind the counsels of the god.
From him sprung Theoclymenus, who found
(The sacred wine yet foaming on the ground)
Telemachus: whom, as to Heaven he press'd
His ardent vows, the stranger thus address'd:

"O thou! that dost thy happy course prepare
With pure libations and with solemn prayer:
By that dread power to whom thy vows are paid;
By all the lives of these; thy own dear head,
Declare sincerely to no foe's demand
Thy name, thy lineage, and paternal land."

"Prepare, then (said Telemachus), to know
A tale from falsehood free, not free from woe.
From Ithaca, of royal birth I came,
And great Ulysses (ever honour'd name!)
Once was my sire, though now, for ever lost,
In Stygian gloom he glides a pensive ghost!
Whose fate inquiring through the world we rove;
The last, the wretched proof of filial love."

The stranger then: "Nor shall I aught conceal,
But the dire secret of my fate reveal.
Of my own tribe an Argive wretch I slew;
Whose powerful friends the luckless deed pursue
With unrelenting rage, and force from home
The blood-stain'd exile, ever doom'd to roam.
But bear, oh bear me o'er yon azure flood;
Receive the suppliant! spare my destined blood!"

"Stranger (replied the prince) securely rest
Affianced in our faith; henceforth our guest."
Thus affable, Ulysses' godlike heir
Takes from the stranger's hand the glittering spear:
He climbs the ship, ascends the stern with haste
And by his side the guest accepted placed.
The chief his order gives: the obedient band,
With due observance wait the chief's command:
With speed the mast they rear, with speed unbind
The spacious sheet, and stretch it to the wind.
Minerva calls; the ready gales obey
With rapid speed to whirl them o'er the sea.
Crunus they pass'd, next Chalcis roll'd away,
With thickening darkness closed the doubtful day;
The silver Phaea's glittering rills they lost,
And skimm'd along by Elis' sacred coast.
Then cautious through the rocky reaches wind,
And turning sudden, shun the death design'd.

Meantime, the king, Eumaeus, and the rest,
Sate in the cottage, at their rural feast:
The banquet pass'd, and satiate every man,
To try his host, Ulysses thus began:

"Yet one night more, my friends, indulge your guest;
The last I purpose in your walls to rest:
To-morrow for myself I must provide,
And only ask your counsel, and a guide;
Patient to roam the street, by hunger led,
And bless the friendly hand that gives me bread.
There in Ulysses' roof I may relate
Ulysses' wanderings to his royal mate;
Or, mingling with the suitors' haughty train,
Not undeserving some support obtain.
Hermes to me his various gifts imparts.
Patron of industry and manual arts:
Few can with me in dexterous works contend,
The pyre to build, the stubborn oak to rend;
To turn the tasteful viand o'er the flame;
Or foam the goblet with a purple stream.
Such are the tasks of men of mean estate,
Whom fortune dooms to serve the rich and great."

"Alas! (Eumaeus with a sigh rejoin'd).
How sprung a thought so monstrous in thy mind?
If on that godless race thou would'st attend,
Fate owes thee sure a miserable end!
Their wrongs and blasphemies ascend the sky,
And pull descending vengeance from on high.
Not such, my friend, the servants of their feast:
A blooming train in rich embroidery dress'd,
With earth's whole tribute the bright table bends,
And smiling round celestial youth attends.
Stay, then: no eye askance beholds thee here;
Sweet is thy converse to each social ear;
Well pleased, and pleasing, in our cottage rest,
Till good Telemachus accepts his guest
With genial gifts, and change of fair attires,
And safe conveys thee where thy soul desires."

To him the man of woes; "O gracious Jove!
Reward this stranger's hospitable love!
Who knows the son of sorrow to relieve,
Cheers the sad heart, nor lets affliction grieve.
Of all the ills unhappy mortals know,
A life of wanderings is the greatest woe;
On all their weary ways wait care and pain,
And pine and penury, a meagre train.
To such a man since harbour you afford,
Relate the farther fortunes of your lord;
What cares his mother's tender breast engage,
And sire forsaken on the verge of age;
Beneath the sun prolong they yet their breath,
Or range the house of darkness and of death?"

To whom the swain: "Attend what you enquire;
Laertes lives, the miserable sire,
Lives, but implores of every power to lay
The burden down, and wishes for the day.
Torn from his offspring in the eve of life,
Torn from the embraces of his tender wife,
Sole, and all comfortless, he wastes away
Old age, untimely posting ere his day.
She too, sad mother! for Ulysses lost
Pined out her bloom, and vanish'd to a ghost;
(So dire a fate, ye righteous gods! avert
From every friendly, every feeling heart!)
While yet she was, though clouded o'er with grief.
Her pleasing converse minister'd relief:
With Climene, her youngest daughter, bred,
One roof contain'd us, and one table fed.
But when the softly-stealing pace of time
Crept on from childhood into youthful prime,
To Samos' isle she sent the wedded fair;
Me to the fields; to tend the rural care;
Array'd in garments her own hands had wove,
Nor less the darling object of her love.
Her hapless death my brighter days o'ercast,
Yet Providence deserts me not at last;
My present labours food and drink procure,
And more, the pleasure to relieve the poor.
Small is the comfort from the queen to hear
Unwelcome news, or vex the royal ear;
Blank and discountenanced the servants stand,
Nor dare to question where the proud command;
No profit springs beneath usurping powers;
Want feeds not there where luxury devours,
Nor harbours charity where riot reigns:
Proud are the lords, and wretched are the swains."

The suffering chief at this began to melt;
And, "O Eumaeus! thou (he cries) hast felt
The spite of fortune too! her cruel hand
Snatch'd thee an infant from thy native land!
Snatch'd from thy parents' arms, thy parents' eyes,
To early wants! a man of miseries!
The whole sad story, from its first, declare:
Sunk the fair city by the rage of war,
Where once thy parents dwelt? or did they keep,
In humbler life, the lowing herds and sheep?
So left perhaps to tend the fleecy train,
Rude pirates seized, and shipp'd thee o'er the main?
Doom'd a fair prize to grace some prince's board,
The worthy purchase of a foreign lord."

"If then my fortunes can delight my friend,
A story fruitful of events attend:
Another's sorrow may thy ears enjoy,
And wine the lengthen'd intervals employ.
Long nights the now declining year bestows;
A part we consecrate to soft repose,
A part in pleasing talk we entertain;
For too much rest itself becomes a pain.
Let those, whom sleep invites, the call obey,
Their cares resuming with the dawning day:
Here let us feast, and to the feast be join'd
Discourse, the sweeter banquet of the mind;
Review the series of our lives, and taste
The melancholy joy of evils pass'd:
For he who much has suffer'd, much will know,
And pleased remembrance builds delight on woe.

"Above Ortygia lies an isle of fame,
Far hence remote, and Syria is the name
(There curious eyes inscribed with wonder trace
The sun's diurnal, and his annual race);
Not large, but fruitful; stored with grass to keep
The bellowing oxen and the bleating sheep;
Her sloping hills the mantling vines adorn,
And her rich valleys wave with golden corn.
No want, no famine, the glad natives know,
Nor sink by sickness to the shades below;
But when a length of years unnerves the strong,
Apollo comes, and Cynthia comes along.
They bend the silver bow with tender skill,
And, void of pain, the silent arrows kill.
Two equal tribes this fertile land divide,
Where two fair cities rise with equal pride.
But both in constant peace one prince obey,
And Ctesius there, my father, holds the sway.
Freighted, it seems, with toys of every sort,
A ship of Sidon anchor'd in our port;
What time it chanced the palace entertain'd,
Skill'd in rich works, a woman of their land:
This nymph, where anchor'd the Phoenician train,
To wash her robes descending to the main,
A smooth tongued sailor won her to his mind
(For love deceives the best of womankind).
A sudden trust from sudden liking grew;
She told her name, her race, and all she knew,
'I too (she cried) from glorious Sidon came,
My father Arybas, of wealthy fame:
But, snatch'd by pirates from my native place,
The Taphians sold me to this man's embrace.'

"'Haste then (the false designing youth replied),
Haste to thy country; love shall be thy guide;
Haste to thy father's house, thy father's breast,
For still he lives, and lives with riches blest.'

"'Swear first (she cried), ye sailors! to restore
A wretch in safety to her native shore.'
Swift as she ask'd, the ready sailors swore.
She then proceeds: 'Now let our compact made
Be nor by signal nor by word betray'd,
Nor near me any of your crew descried,
By road frequented, or by fountain side.
Be silence still our guard. The monarch's spies
(For watchful age is ready to surmise)
Are still at hand; and this, revealed, must be
Death to yourselves, eternal chains to me.
Your vessel loaded, and your traffic pass'd,
Despatch a wary messenger with haste;
Then gold and costly treasures will I bring,
And more, the infant offspring of the king.
Him, child-like wandering forth, I'll lead away
(A noble prize!) and to your ship convey.'

"Thus spoke the dame, and homeward took the road.
A year they traffic, and their vessel load.
Their stores complete, and ready now to weigh,
A spy was sent their summons to convey:
An artist to my father's palace came,
With gold and amber chains, elaborate frame:
Each female eye the glittering links employ;
They turn, review, and cheapen every toy.
He took the occasion, as they stood intent,
Gave her the sign, and to his vessel went.
She straight pursued, and seized my willing arm;
I follow'd, smiling, innocent of harm.
Three golden goblets in the porch she found
(The guests not enter'd, but the table crown'd);
Hid in her fraudful bosom these she bore:
Now set the sun, and darken'd all the shore.
Arriving then, where tilting on the tides
Prepared to launch the freighted vessel rides,
Aboard they heave us, mount their decks, and sweep
With level oar along the glassy deep.
Six calmy days and six smooth nights we sail,
And constant Jove supplied the gentle gale.
The seventh, the fraudful wretch (no cause descried),
Touch'd by Diana's vengeful arrow, died.
Down dropp'd the caitiff-corse, a worthless load,
Down to the deep; there roll'd, the future food
Of fierce sea-wolves, and monsters of the flood.
An helpless infant I remain'd behind;
Thence borne to Ithaca by wave and wind;
Sold to Laertes by divine command,
And now adopted to a foreign land."

To him the king: "Reciting thus thy cares,
My secret soul in all thy sorrow shares;
But one choice blessing (such is Jove's high will)
Has sweeten'd all thy bitter draught of ill:
Torn from thy country to no hapless end,
The gods have, in a master, given a friend.
Whatever frugal nature needs is thine
(For she needs little), daily bread and wine.
While I, so many wanderings past, and woes,
Live but on what thy poverty bestows."

So passed in pleasing dialogue away
The night; then down to short repose they lay;
Till radiant rose the messenger of day.
While in the port of Ithaca, the band
Of young Telemachus approach'd the land;
Their sails they loosed, they lash'd the mast aside,
And cast their anchors, and the cables tied:
Then on the breezy shore, descending, join
In grateful banquet o'er the rosy wine.
When thus the prince: "Now each his course pursue;
I to the fields, and to the city you.
Long absent hence, I dedicate this day
My swains to visit, and the works survey.
Expect me with the morn, to pay the skies
Our debt of safe return in feast and sacrifice."

Then Theoclymenus: "But who shall lend,
Meantime, protection to thy stranger friend?
Straight to the queen and palace shall I fly,
Or yet more distant, to some lord apply?"

The prince return'd: "Renown'd in days of yore
Has stood our father's hospitable door;
No other roof a stranger should receive,
No other hands than ours the welcome give.
But in my absence riot fills the place,
Nor bears the modest queen a stranger's face;
From noiseful revel far remote she flies,
But rarely seen, or seen with weeping eyes.
No--let Eurymachus receive my guest,
Of nature courteous, and by far the best;
He woos the queen with more respectful flame,
And emulates her former husband's fame,
With what success, 'tis Jove's alone to know,
And the hoped nuptials turn to joy or woe."

Thus speaking, on the right up-soar'd in air
The hawk, Apollo's swift-wing'd messenger:
His dreadful pounces tore a trembling dove;
The clotted feathers, scatter'd from above,
Between the hero and the vessel pour
Thick plumage mingled with a sanguine shower.

The observing augur took the prince aside,
Seized by the hand, and thus prophetic cried:
"Yon bird, that dexter cuts the aerial road,
Rose ominous, nor flies without a god:
No race but thine shall Ithaca obey,
To thine, for ages, Heaven decrees the sway."

"Succeed the omens, gods! (the youth rejoin'd:)
Soon shall my bounties speak a grateful mind,
And soon each envied happiness attend
The man who calls Telemachus his friend."
Then to Peiraeus: "Thou whom time has proved
A faithful servant, by thy prince beloved!
Till we returning shall our guest demand,
Accept this charge with honour, at our hand."

To this Peiraeus: "Joyful I obey,
Well pleased the hospitable rites to pay.
The presence of thy guest shall best reward
(If long thy stay) the absence of my lord."

With that, their anchors he commands to weigh,
Mount the tall bark, and launch into the sea.
All with obedient haste forsake the shores,
And, placed in order, spread their equal oars.
Then from the deck the prince his sandals takes;
Poised in his hand the pointed javelin shakes.
They part; while, lessening from the hero's view
Swift to the town the well-row'd galley flew:
The hero trod the margin of the main,
And reach'd the mansion of his faithful swain.

Soon as the morning blush'd along the plains,
Ulysses, and the monarch of the swains,
Awake the sleeping fires, their meals prepare,
And forth to pasture send the bristly care.
The prince's near approach the dogs descry,
And fawning round his feet confess their joy.
Their gentle blandishment the king survey'd,
Heard his resounding step, and instant said:

"Some well-known friend, Eumaeus, bends this way;
His steps I hear; the dogs familiar play."

While yet he spoke, the prince advancing drew
Nigh to the lodge, and now appear'd in view.
Transported from his seat Eumaeus sprung,
Dropp'd the full bowl, and round his bosom hung;
Kissing his cheek, his hand, while from his eye
The tears rain'd copious in a shower of joy,
As some fond sire who ten long winters grieves,
From foreign climes an only son receives
(Child of his age), with strong paternal joy,
Forward he springs, and clasps the favourite boy:
So round the youth his arms Eumaeus spread,
As if the grave had given him from the dead.

"And is it thou? my ever-dear delight!
Oh, art thou come to bless my longing sight?
Never, I never hoped to view this day,
When o'er the waves you plough'd the desperate way.
Enter, my child! Beyond my hopes restored,
Oh give these eyes to feast upon their lord.
Enter, oh seldom seen! for lawless powers
Too much detain thee from these sylvan bowers,"
The prince replied: "Eumaeus, I obey;
To seek thee, friend, I hither took my way.
But say, if in the court the queen reside
Severely chaste, or if commenced a bride?"

Thus he; and thus the monarch of the swains:
"Severely chaste Penelope remains;
But, lost to every joy, she wastes the day
In tedious cares, and weeps the night away."

He ended, and (receiving as they pass
The javelin pointed with a star of brass),
They reach'd the dome; the dome with marble shined.
His seat Ulysses to the prince resign'd.
"Not so (exclaims the prince with decent grace)
For me, this house shall find an humbler place:
To usurp the honours due to silver hairs
And reverend strangers modest youth forbears."
Instant the swain the spoils of beasts supplies,
And bids the rural throne with osiers rise.
There sate the prince: the feast Eumaeus spread,
And heap'd the shining canisters with bread.
Thick o'er the board the plenteous viands lay,
The frugal remnants of the former day.
Then in a bowl he tempers generous wines,
Around whose verge a mimic ivy twines.
And now, the rage of thirst and hunger fled,
Thus young Ulysses to Eumaeus said:

"Whence, father, from what shore this stranger, say?
What vessel bore him o'er the watery way?
To human step our land impervious lies,
And round the coast circumfluent oceans rise."

The swain returns: "A tale of sorrows hear:
In spacious Crete he drew his natal air;
Long doom'd to wander o'er the land and main,
For Heaven has wove his thread of life with pain.
Half breathless 'scaping to the land he flew
From Thesprot mariners, a murderous crew.
To thee, my son, the suppliant I resign;
I gave him my protection, grant him thine."

"Hard task (he cries) thy virtue gives thy friend,
Willing to aid, unable to defend.
Can strangers safely in the court reside,
'Midst the swell'd insolence of lust and pride?
E'en I unsafe: the queen in doubt to wed,
Or pay due honours to the nuptial bed.
Perhaps she weds regardless of her fame,
Deaf to the mighty Ulyssean name.
However, stranger! from our grace receive
Such honours as befit a prince to give;
Sandals, a sword and robes, respect to prove,
And safe to sail with ornaments of love.
Till then, thy guest amid the rural train,
Far from the court, from danger far, detain.
'Tis mine with food the hungry to supply,
And clothe the naked from the inclement sky.
Here dwell in safety from the suitors' wrongs,
And the rude insults of ungovern'd tongues.
For should'st thou suffer, powerless to relieve,
I must behold it, and can only grieve.
The brave, encompass'd by an hostile train,
O'erpower'd by numbers, is but brave in vain."

To whom, while anger in his bosom glows,
With warmth replies the man of mighty woes:
"Since audience mild is deign'd, permit my tongue
At once to pity and resent thy wrong.
My heart weeps blood to see a soul so brave
Live to base insolence or power a slave,
But tell me, dost thou, prince, dost thou behold,
And hear their midnight revels uncontroll'd?
Say, do thy subjects in bold faction rise,
Or priests in fabled oracles advise?
Or are thy brothers, who should aid thy power,
Turn'd mean deserters in the needful hour?
Oh that I were from great Ulysses sprung,
Or that these wither'd nerves like thine were strung,
Or, heavens! might he return! (and soon appear
He shall, I trust; a hero scorns despair:)
Might he return, I yield my life a prey
To my worst foe, if that avenging day
Be not their last: but should I lose my life,
Oppress'd by numbers in the glorious strife,
I chose the nobler part, and yield my breath,
Rather than bear dishonor, worse than death;
Than see the hand of violence invade
The reverend stranger and the spotless maid;
Than see the wealth of kings consumed in waste,
The drunkard's revel, and the gluttons' feast."

Thus he, with anger flashing from his eye;
Sincere the youthful hero made reply:
"Nor leagued in factious arms my subjects rise,
Nor priests in fabled oracles advise;
Nor are my brothers, who should aid my power,
Turn'd mean deserters in the needful hour.
Ah me! I boast no brother; heaven's dread King
Gives from our stock an only branch to spring:
Alone Laertes reign'd Arcesius' heir,
Alone Ulysses drew the vital air,
And I alone the bed connubial graced,
An unbless'd offspring of a sire unbless'd!
Each neighbouring realm, conducive to our woe,
Sends forth her peers, and every peer a foe:
The court proud Samos and Dulichium fills,
And lofty Zacinth crown'd with shady hills.
E'en Ithaca and all her lords invade
The imperial sceptre, and the regal bed:
The queen, averse to love, yet awed by power,
Seems half to yield, yet flies the bridal hour:
Meantime their licence uncontroll'd I bear;
E'en now they envy me the vital air:
But Heaven will sure revenge, and gods there are.

"But go Eumaeus! to the queen impart
Our safe return, and ease a mother's heart.
Yet secret go; for numerous are my foes,
And here at least I may in peace repose."

To whom the swain: "I hear and I obey:
But old Laertes weeps his life away,
And deems thee lost: shall I speed employ
To bless his age: a messenger of joy?
The mournful hour that tore his son away
Sent the sad sire in solitude to stray;
Yet busied with his slaves, to ease his woe,
He dress'd the vine, and bade the garden blow,
Nor food nor wine refused; but since the day
That you to Pylos plough'd the watery way,
Nor wine nor food he tastes; but, sunk in woes,
Wild springs the vine, no more the garden blows,
Shut from the walks of men, to pleasure lost,
Pensive and pale he wanders half a ghost."

"Wretched old man! (with tears the prince returns)
Yet cease to go--what man so blest but mourns?
Were every wish indulged by favouring skies,
This hour should give Ulysses to my eyes.
But to the queen with speed dispatchful bear,
Our safe return, and back with speed repair;
And let some handmaid of her train resort
To good Laertes in his rural court."

While yet he spoke, impatient of delay,
He braced his sandals on, and strode away:
Then from the heavens the martial goddess flies
Through the wild fields of air, and cleaves the skies:
In form, a virgin in soft beauty's bloom,
Skill'd in the illustrious labours of the loom.
Alone to Ithaca she stood display'd,
But unapparent as a viewless shade
Escaped Telemachus (the powers above,
Seen or unseen, o'er earth at pleasure move):
The dogs intelligent confess'd the tread
Of power divine, and howling, trembling, fled.
The goddess, beckoning, waves her deathless hands:
Dauntless the king before the goddess stands:

"Then why (she said), O favour'd of the skies!
Why to thy godlike son this long disguise?
Stand forth reveal'd; with him thy cares employ
Against thy foes; be valiant and destroy!
Lo! I descend in that avenging hour,
To combat by thy side, thy guardian power."

She said, and o'er him waves her wand of gold
Imperial robes his manly limbs infold;
At once with grace divine his frame improves;
At once with majesty enlarged he moves:
Youth flush'd his reddening cheek, and from his brows
A length of hair in sable ringlets flows;
His blackening chin receives a deeper shade;
Then from his eyes upsprung the warrior-maid.

The hero reascends: the prince o'erawed
Scarce lifts his eyes, and bows as to a god,
Then with surprise (surprise chastised by fears):
"How art thou changed! (he cried)--a god appears!
Far other vests thy limbs majestic grace,
Far other glories lighten from thy face!
If heaven be thy abode, with pious care,
Lo! I the ready sacrifice prepare:
Lo! gifts of labour'd gold adorn thy shrine,
To win thy grace: O save us, power divine!"

"Few are my days (Ulysses made reply),
Nor I, alas! descendant of the sky.
I am thy father. O my son! my son!
That father, for whose sake thy days have run
One scene of woe! to endless cares consign'd,
And outraged by the wrongs of base mankind."

Then, rushing to his arms, he kiss'd his boy
With the strong raptures of a parent's joy.
Tears bathe his cheek, and tears the ground bedew:
He strain'd him close, as to his breast he grew.
"Ah me! (exclaims the prince with fond desire)
Thou art not--no, thou canst not be my sire.
Heaven such illusion only can impose,
By the false joy to aggravate my woes.
Who but a god can change the general doom,
And give to wither'd age a youthful bloom!
Late, worn with years, in weeds obscene you trod;
Now, clothed in majesty, you move a god!"

"Forbear (he cried,) for Heaven reserve that name;
Give to thy father but a father's claim;
Other Ulysses shalt thou never see,
I am Ulysses, I, my son, am he.
Twice ten sad years o'er earth and ocean toss'd,
'Tis given at length to view my native coast.
Pallas, unconquer'd maid, my frame surrounds
With grace divine: her power admits no bounds;
She o'er my limbs old age and wrinkles shed;
Now strong as youth, magnificent I tread.
The gods with ease frail man depress or raise,
Exalt the lowly, or the proud debase."

He spoke and sate. The prince with transport flew,
Hung round his neck, while tears his cheek bedew;
Nor less the father pour'd a social flood;
They wept abundant, and they wept aloud.
As the bold eagle with fierce sorrow stung,
Or parent vulture, mourns her ravish'd young;
They cry, they scream, their unfledged brood a prey
To some rude churl, and borne by stealth away:
So they aloud: and tears in tides had run,
Their grief unfinish'd with the setting sun;
But checking the full torrent in its flow,
The prince thus interrupts the solemn woe.
"What ship transported thee, O father, say;
And what bless'd hands have oar'd thee on the way?"

"All, all (Ulysses instant made reply),
I tell thee all, my child, my only joy!
Phaeacians bore me to the port assign'd,
A nation ever to the stranger kind;
Wrapp'd in the embrace of sleep, the faithful train
O'er seas convey'd me to my native reign:
Embroider'd vestures, gold, and brass, are laid
Conceal'd in caverns in the sylvan shade.
Hither, intent the rival rout to slay,
And plan the scene of death, I bend my way;
So Pallas wills--but thou, my son, explain
The names and numbers of the audacious train;
'Tis mine to judge if better to employ
Assistant force, or singly to destroy."

"O'er earth (returns the prince) resounds thy name,
Thy well-tried wisdom, and thy martial fame,
Yet at thy words I start, in wonder lost;
Can we engage, not decades but an host?
Can we alone in furious battle stand,
Against that numerous and determined band?
Hear then their numbers; from Dulichium came
Twice twenty-six, all peers of mighty name.
Six are their menial train: twice twelve the boast
Of Samos; twenty from Zacynthus' coast:
And twelve our country's pride; to these belong
Medon and Phemius, skill'd in heavenly song.
Two sewers from day to day the revels wait,
Exact of taste, and serve the feast in state.
With such a foe the unequal fight to try,
Were by false courage unrevenged to die.
Then what assistant powers you boast relate,
Ere yet we mingle in the stern debate."

"Mark well my voice, (Ulysses straight replies:)
What need of aids, if favour'd by the skies?
If shielded to the dreadful fight we move,
By mighty Pallas, and by thundering Jove?"

"Sufficient they (Telemachus rejoin'd)
Against the banded powers of all mankind:
They, high enthroned above the rolling clouds,
Wither the strength of man, and awe the gods."

"Such aids expect (he cries,) when strong in might
We rise terrific to the task of fight.
But thou, when morn salutes the aerial plain,
The court revisit and the lawless train:
Me thither in disguise Eumaeus leads,
An aged mendicant in tatter'd weeds.
There, if base scorn insult my reverend age,
Bear it, my son! repress thy rising rage.
If outraged, cease that outrage to repel;
Bear it, my son! howe'er thy heart rebel.
Yet strive by prayer and counsel to restrain
Their lawless insults, though thou strive in vain:
For wicked ears are deaf to wisdom's call,
And vengeance strikes whom Heaven has doom'd to fall.
Once more attend: when she whose power inspires
The thinking mind, my soul to vengeance fires,
I give the sign: that instant, from beneath,
Aloft convey the instruments of death,
Armour and arms; and, if mistrust arise,
Thus veil the truth in plausible disguise:

"'These glittering weapons, ere he sail'd to Troy,
Ulysses view'd with stern heroic joy:
Then, beaming o'er the illumined wall they shone;
Now dust dishonours, all their lustre gone.
I bear them hence (so Jove my soul inspires),
From the pollution of the fuming fires;
Lest when the bowl inflames, in vengeful mood
Ye rush to arms, and stain the feast with blood:
Oft ready swords in luckless hour incite
The hand of wrath, and arm it for the fight.'

"Such be the plea, and by the plea deceive:
For Jove infatuates all, and all believe.
Yet leave for each of us a sword to wield,
A pointed javelin, and a fenceful shield.
But by my blood that in thy bosom glows,
By that regard a son his father owes;
The secret, that thy father lives, retain
Lock'd in thy bosom from the household train;
Hide it from all; e'en from Eumaeus hide,
From my dear father, and my dearer bride.
One care remains, to note the loyal few
Whose faith yet lasts among the menial crew;
And noting, ere we rise in vengeance, prove
Who love his prince; for sure you merit love."

To whom the youth: "To emulate, I aim,
The brave and wise, and my great father's fame.
But reconsider, since the wisest err,
Vengeance resolved, 'tis dangerous to defer.
What length of time must we consume in vain,
Too curious to explore the menial train!
While the proud foes, industrious to destroy
Thy wealth, in riot the delay enjoy.
Suffice it in this exigence alone
To mark the damsels that attend the throne:
Dispersed the youth reside; their faith to prove
Jove grants henceforth, if thou hast spoke from Jove."

While in debate they waste the hours away,
The associates of the prince repass'd the bay:
With speed they guide the vessel to the shores;
With speed debarking land the naval stores:
Then, faithful to their charge, to Clytius bear,
And trust the presents to his friendly care.
Swift to the queen a herald flies to impart
Her son's return, and ease a parent's heart:
Lest a sad prey to ever-musing cares,
Pale grief destroy what time awhile forbears.
The incautious herald with impatience burns,
And cries aloud, "Thy son, O queen, returns;"
Eumaeus sage approach'd the imperial throne,
And breathed his mandate to her ear alone,
Then measured back the way. The suitor band,
Stung to the soul, abash'd, confounded, stand;
And issuing from the dome, before the gate,
With clouded looks, a pale assembly sate.

At length Eurymachus: "Our hopes are vain;
Telemachus in triumph sails the main.
Haste, rear the mast, the swelling shroud display;
Haste, to our ambush'd friends the news convey!"

Scarce had he spake, when, turning to the strand,
Amphinomos survey'd the associate band;
Full to the bay within the winding shores
With gather'd sails they stood, and lifted oars.
"O friends!" he cried, elate with rising joy,
"See to the port secure the vessel fly!
Some god has told them, or themselves survey
The bark escaped; and measure back their way."

Swift at the word descending to the shores,
They moor the vessel and unlade the stores:
Then, moving from the strand, apart they sate,
And full and frequent form'd a dire debate.

"Lives then the boy? he lives (Antinous cries),
The care of gods and favourite of the skies.
All night we watch'd, till with her orient wheels
Aurora flamed above the eastern hills,
And from the lofty brow of rocks by day
Took in the ocean with a broad survey
Yet safe he sails; the powers celestial give
To shun the hidden snares of death, and live.
But die he shall, and thus condemn'd to bleed,
Be now the scene of instant death decreed.
Hope ye success? undaunted crush the foe.
Is he not wise? know this, and strike the blow.
Wait ye, till he to arms in council draws
The Greeks, averse too justly to our cause?
Strike, ere, the states convened, the foe betray
Our murderous ambush on the watery way.
Or choose ye vagrant from their rage to fly,
Outcasts of earth, to breathe an unknown sky?
The brave prevent misfortune; then be brave,
And bury future danger in his grave.
Returns he? ambush'd we'll his walk invade,
Or where he hides in solitude and shade;
And give the palace to the queen a dower,
Or him she blesses in the bridal hour.
But if submissive you resign the sway,
Slaves to a boy, go, flatter and obey.
Retire we instant to our native reign,
Nor be the wealth of kings consumed in vain;
Then wed whom choice approves: the queen be given
To some blest prince, the prince decreed by Heaven."

Abash'd, the suitor train his voice attends;
Till from his throne Amphinomus ascends,
Who o'er Dulichium stretch'd his spacious reign,
A land of plenty, bless'd with every grain:
Chief of the numbers who the queen address'd,
And though displeasing, yet displeasing least.
Soft were his words; his actions wisdom sway'd;
Graceful awhile he paused, then mildly said:

"O friends, forbear! and be the thought withstood:
'Tis horrible to shed imperial blood!
Consult we first the all-seeing powers above,
And the sure oracles of righteous Jove.
If they assent, e'en by this hand he dies;
If they forbid, I war not with the skies."

He said: the rival train his voice approved,
And rising instant to the palace moved.
Arrived, with wild tumultuous noise they sate,
Recumbent on the shining thrones of state.

The Medon, conscious of their dire debates,
The murderous counsel to the queen relates.
Touch'd at the dreadful story, she descends:
Her hasty steps a damsel train attends.
Full where the dome its shining valves expands,
Sudden before the rival powers she stands;
And, veiling, decent, with a modest shade
Her cheek, indignant to Antinous said:

"O void of faith! of all bad men the worst!
Renown'd for wisdom, by the abuse accursed!
Mistaking fame proclaims thy generous mind:
Thy deeds denote thee of the basest kind.
Wretch! to destroy a prince that friendship gives,
While in his guest his murderer he receives;
Nor dread superior Jove, to whom belong
The cause of suppliants, and revenge of wrong.
Hast thou forgot, ungrateful as thou art,
Who saved thy father with a friendly part?
Lawless he ravaged with his martial powers
The Taphian pirates on Thesprotia's shores;
Enraged, his life, his treasures they demand;
Ulysses saved him from the avenger's hand.
And would'st thou evil for his good repay?
His bed dishonour, and his house betray?
Afflict his queen, and with a murderous hand
Destroy his heir!--but cease, 'tis I command."

"Far hence those fears (Eurymachus replied,)
O prudent princess! bid thy soul confide.
Breathes there a man who dares that hero slay,
While I behold the golden light of day?
No: by the righteous powers of heaven I swear,
His blood in vengeance smokes upon my spear.
Ulysses, when my infant days I led,
With wine sufficed me, and with dainties fed:
My generous soul abhors the ungrateful part,
And my friend's son lives nearest to my heart.
Then fear no mortal arm; if Heaven destroy,
We must resign: for man is born to die."

Thus smooth he ended, yet his death conspired:
Then sorrowing, with sad step the queen retired,
With streaming eyes, all comfortless deplored,
Touch'd with the dear remembrance of her lord:
Nor ceased till Pallas bids her sorrows fly,
And in soft slumber seal'd her flowing eye.

And now Eumaeus, at the evening hour,
Came late, returning to his sylvan bower.
Ulysses and his son had dress'd with art
A yearling boar, and gave the gods their part.
Holy repast! That instant from the skies
The martial goddess to Ulysses flies:
She waves her golden wand, and reassumes
From every feature every grace that blooms;
At once his vestures change; at once she sheds
Age o'er his limbs, that tremble as he treads:
Lest to the queen the swain with transport fly,
Unable to contain the unruly joy;
When near he drew, the prince breaks forth: "Proclaim
What tidings, friend? what speaks the voice of fame?
Say, if the suitors measure back the main,
Or still in ambush thirst for blood in vain?"

"Whether (he cries) they measure back the flood,
Or still in ambush thirst in vain for blood,
Escaped my care: where lawless suitors sway,
Thy mandate borne my soul disdain'd to stay.
But from the Hermaean height I cast a view,
Where to the port a bark high-bounding flew;
Her freight a shining band: with martial air
Each poised his shield, and each advanced his spear;
And, if aright these searching eyes survey,
The eluded suitors stem the watery way."

The prince, well pleased to disappoint their wiles,
Steals on his sire a glance, and secret smiles.
And now, a short repast prepared, they fed
Till the keen rage of craving hunger fled:
Then to repose withdrawn, apart they lay,
And in soft sleep forgot the cares of day.

Soon as Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
Sprinkled with roseate light the dewy lawn,
In haste the prince arose, prepared to part;
His hand impatient grasps the pointed dart;
Fair on his feet the polish'd sandals shine,
And thus he greets the master of the swine:

"My friend, adieu! let this short stay suffice;
I haste to meet my mother's longing eyes,
And end her tears, her sorrows and her sighs.
But thou, attentive, what we order heed:
This hapless stranger to the city lead:
By public bounty let him there be fed,
And bless the hand that stretches forth the bread.
To wipe the tears from all afflicted eyes,
My will may covet, but my power denies.
If this raise anger in the stranger's thought,
The pain of anger punishes the fault:
The very truth I undisguised declare;
For what so easy as to be sincere?"

To this Ulysses: "What the prince requires
Of swift removal, seconds my desires.
To want like mine the peopled town can yield
More hopes of comfort than the lonely field:
Nor fits my age to till the labour'd lands,
Or stoop to tasks a rural lord demands.
Adieu! but since this ragged garb can bear
So ill the inclemencies of morning air,
A few hours' space permit me here to stay:
My steps Eumaeus shall to town convey,
With riper beams when Phoebus warms the day."

Thus he: nor aught Telemachus replied,
But left the mansion with a lofty stride:
Schemes of revenge his pondering breast elate,
Revolving deep the suitors' sudden fate,
Arriving now before the imperial hall,
He props his spear against the pillar'd wall;
Then like a lion o'er the threshold bounds;
The marble pavement with his steps resounds:
His eye first glanced where Euryclea spreads
With furry spoils of beasts the splendid beds:
She saw, she wept, she ran with eager pace,
And reach'd her master with a long embrace.
All crowded round, the family appears
With wild entrancement, and ecstatic tears.
Swift from above descends the royal fair
(Her beauteous cheeks the blush of Venus wear,
Chasten'd with coy Diana's pensive air);
Hangs o'er her son, in his embraces dies;
Rains kisses on his neck, his face, his eyes:
Few words she spoke, though much she had to say;
And scarce those few, for tears, could force their way.

"Light of my eyes: he comes! unhoped-for joy!
Has Heaven from Pylos brought my lovely boy?
So snatch'd from all our cares!--Tell, hast thou known
Thy father's fate, and tell me all thy own."

"Oh dearest! most revered of womankind!
Cease with those tears to melt a manly mind
(Replied the prince); nor be our fates deplored,
From death and treason to thy arms restored.
Go bathe, and robed in white ascend the towers;
With all thy handmaids thank the immortal powers;
To every god vow hecatombs to bleed.
And call Jove's vengeance on their guilty deed.
While to the assembled council I repair:
A stranger sent by Heaven attends me there;
My new accepted guest I haste to find,
Now to Peiraeus' honour'd charge consign'd."

The matron heard, nor was his word in vain.
She bathed; and, robed in white, with all her train,
To every god vow'd hecatombs to bleed,
And call'd Jove's vengeance on the guilty deed,
Arm'd with his lance, the prince then pass'd the gate,
Two dogs behind, a faithful guard, await;
Pallas his form with grace divine improves:
The gazing crowd admires him as he moves.
Him, gathering round, the haughty suitors greet
With semblance fair, but inward deep deceit,
Their false addresses, generous, he denied.
Pass'd on, and sate by faithful Mentor's side;
With Antiphus, and Halitherses sage
(His father's counsellors, revered for age).
Of his own fortunes, and Ulysses' fame,
Much ask'd the seniors; till Peiraeus came.
The stranger-guest pursued him close behind;
Whom when Telemachus beheld, he join'd.
He (when Peiraeus ask'd for slaves to bring
The gifts and treasures of the Spartan king)
Thus thoughtful answer'd: "Those we shall not move,
Dark and unconscious of the will of Jove;
We know not yet the full event of all:
Stabb'd in his palace if your prince must fall,
Us, and our house, if treason must o'erthrow,
Better a friend possess them than a foe;
If death to these, and vengeance Heaven decree,
Riches are welcome then, not else, to me.
Till then retain the gifts."--The hero said,
And in his hand the willing stranger led.
Then disarray'd, the shining bath they sought
(With unguents smooth) of polish'd marble wrought:
Obedient handmaids with assistant toil
Supply the limpid wave, and fragrant oil:
Then o'er their limbs refulgent robes they threw,
And fresh from bathing to their seats withdrew.
The golden ewer a nymph attendant brings,
Replenish'd from the pure translucent springs;
With copious streams that golden ewer supplies
A silver layer of capacious size.
They wash: the table, in fair order spread,
Is piled with viands and the strength of bread.
Full opposite, before the folding gate,
The pensive mother sits in humble state;
Lowly she sate, and with dejected view
The fleecy threads her ivory fingers drew.
The prince and stranger shared the genial feast,
Till now the rage of thirst and hunger ceased.

When thus the queen: "My son! my only friend!
Say, to my mournful couch shall I ascend?
(The couch deserted now a length of years;
The couch for ever water'd with my tears;)
Say, wilt thou not (ere yet the suitor crew
Return, and riot shakes our walls anew),
Say, wilt thou not the least account afford?
The least glad tidings of my absent lord?"

To her the youth. "We reach'd the Pylian plains,
Where Nestor, shepherd of his people, reigns.
All arts of tenderness to him are known,
Kind to Ulysses' race as to his own;
No father with a fonder grasp of joy
Strains to his bosom his long-absent boy.
But all unknown, if yet Ulysses breathe,
Or glide a spectre in the realms beneath;
For farther search, his rapid steeds transport
My lengthen'd journey to the Spartan court.
There Argive Helen I beheld, whose charms
(So Heaven decreed) engaged the great in arms.
My cause of coming told, he thus rejoin'd;
And still his words live perfect in my mind:

"'Heavens! would a soft, inglorious, dastard train
An absent hero's nuptial joys profane
So with her young, amid the woodland shades,
A timorous hind the lion's court invades,
Leaves in that fatal lair her tender fawns,
And climbs the cliffs, or feeds along the lawns;
Meantime returning, with remorseless sway
The monarch savage rends the panting prey:
With equal fury, and with equal fame,
Shall great Ulysses reassert his claim.
O Jove! supreme! whom men and gods revere;
And thou whose lustre gilds the rolling sphere!
With power congenial join'd, propitious aid
The chief adopted by the martial maid!
Such to our wish the warrior soon restore,
As when, contending on the Lesbian shore,
His prowess Philomelides confess'd,
And loud acclaiming Greeks the victor bless'd:
Then soon the invaders of his bed, and throne,
Their love presumptuous shall by death atone.
Now what you question of my ancient friend,
With truth I answer; thou the truth attend.
Learn what I heard the sea-born seer relate,
Whose eye can pierce the dark recess of fate
Sole in an isle, imprison'd by the main,
The sad survivor of his numerous train,
Ulysses lies; detain'd by magic charms,
And press'd unwilling in Calypso's arms.
No sailors there, no vessels to convey,
No oars to cut the immeasurable way.'
This told Atrides, and he told no more.
Then safe I voyaged to my native shore."

He ceased; nor made the pensive queen reply,
But droop'd her head, and drew a secret sigh.
When Theoclymenus the seer began:
"O suffering consort of the suffering man!
What human knowledge could, those kings might tell,
But I the secrets of high heaven reveal.
Before the first of gods be this declared,
Before the board whose blessings we have shared;
Witness the genial rites, and witness all
This house holds sacred in her ample wall!
E'en now, this instant, great Ulysses, laid
At rest, or wandering in his country's shade,
Their guilty deeds, in hearing, and in view,
Secret revolves; and plans the vengeance due.
Of this sure auguries the gods bestow'd,
When first our vessel anchor'd in your road."
"Succeed those omens, Heaven! (the queen rejoin'd)
So shall our bounties speak a grateful mind;
And every envied happiness attend
The man who calls Penelope his friend."
Thus communed they: while in the marble court
(Scene of their insolence) the lords resort:
Athwart the spacious square each tries his art,
To whirl the disk, or aim the missile dart.
Now did the hour of sweet repast arrive,
And from the field the victim flocks they drive:
Medon the herald (one who pleased them best,
And honour'd with a portion of their feast),
To bid the banquet, interrupts their play:
Swift to the hall they haste; aside they lay
Their garments, and succinct the victims slay.
Then sheep, and goats, and bristly porkers bled,
And the proud steer was o'er the marble spread.
While thus the copious banquet they provide,
Along the road, conversing side by side,
Proceed Ulysses and the faithful swain;
When thus Eumaeus, generous and humane:
"To town, observant of our lord's behest,
Now let us speed; my friend no more my guest!
Yet like myself I wish thee here preferr'd,
Guard of the flock, or keeper of the herd,
But much to raise my master's wrath I fear;
The wrath of princes ever is severe.
Then heed his will, and be our journey made
While the broad beams of Phoebus are display'd,
Or ere brown evening spreads her chilly shade."
"Just thy advice (the prudent chief rejoin'd),
And such as suits the dictate of my mind.
Lead on: but help me to some staff to stay
My feeble step, since rugged is the way."
Across his shoulders then the scrip he flung,
Wide-patch'd, and fasten'd by a twisted thong.
A staff Eumaeus gave. Along the way
Cheerly they fare: behind, the keepers stay:
These with their watchful dogs (a constant guard)
Supply his absence, and attend the herd.
And now his city strikes the monarch's eyes,
Alas! how changed! a man of miseries;
Propp'd on a staff, a beggar old and bare
In rags dishonest fluttering with the air!
Now pass'd the rugged road, they journey down
The cavern'd way descending to the town,
Where, from the rock, with liquid drops distils
A limpid fount; that spread in parting rills
Its current thence to serve the city brings;
An useful work, adorn'd by ancient kings.
Neritus, Ithacus, Polyctor, there,
In sculptured stone immortalized their care,
In marble urns received it from above,
And shaded with a green surrounding grove;
Where silver alders, in high arches twined,
Drink the cool stream, and tremble to the wind.
Beneath, sequester'd to the nymphs, is seen
A mossy altar, deep embower'd in green;
Where constant vows by travellers are paid,
And holy horrors solemnize the shade.

Here with his goats (not vow'd to sacred fame,
But pamper'd luxury) Melanthias came:
Two grooms attend him. With an envious look
He eyed the stranger, and imperious spoke:

"The good old proverb how this pair fulfil!
One rogue is usher to another still.
Heaven with a secret principle endued
Mankind, to seek their own similitude.
Where goes the swineherd with that ill-look'd guest?
That giant-glutton, dreadful at a feast!
Full many a post have those broad shoulders worn,
From every great man's gate repulsed with scorn:
To no brave prize aspired the worthless swain,
'Twas but for scraps he ask'd, and ask'd in vain.
To beg, than work, he better understands,
Or we perhaps might take him off thy hands.
For any office could the slave be good,
To cleanse the fold, or help the kids to food.
If any labour those big joints could learn,
Some whey, to wash his bowels, he might earn.
To cringe, to whine, his idle hands to spread,
Is all, by which that graceless maw is fed.
Yet hear me! if thy impudence but dare
Approach yon wall, I prophesy thy fare:
Dearly, full dearly, shalt thou buy thy bread
With many a footstool thundering at thy head."

He thus: nor insolent of word alone,
Spurn'd with his rustic heel his king unknown;
Spurn'd, but not moved: he like a pillar stood,
Nor stirr'd an inch, contemptuous, from the road:
Doubtful, or with his staff to strike him dead,
Or greet the pavement with his worthless head.
Short was that doubt; to quell his rage inured,
The hero stood self-conquer'd, and endured.
But hateful of the wretch, Eumaeus heaved
His hands obtesting, and this prayer conceived:
"Daughters of Jove! who from the ethereal bowers
Descend to swell the springs, and feed the flowers!
Nymphs of this fountain! to whose sacred names
Our rural victims mount in blazing flames!
To whom Ulysses' piety preferr'd
The yearly firstlings of his flock and herd;
Succeed my wish, your votary restore:
Oh, be some god his convoy to our shore!
Due pains shall punish then this slave's offence,
And humble all his airs of insolence,
Who, proudly stalking, leaves the herds at large,
Commences courtier, and neglects his charge."

"What mutters he? (Melanthius sharp rejoins;)
This crafty miscreant, big with dark designs?
The day shall come--nay, 'tis already near--
When, slave! to sell thee at a price too dear
Must be my care; and hence transport thee o'er,
A load and scandal to this happy shore.
Oh! that as surely great Apollo's dart,
Or some brave suitor's sword, might pierce the heart
Of the proud son; as that we stand this hour
In lasting safety from the father's power!"

So spoke the wretch, but, shunning farther fray,
Turn'd his proud step, and left them on their way.
Straight to the feastful palace he repair'd,
Familiar enter'd, and the banquet shared;
Beneath Eurymachus, his patron lord,
He took his place, and plenty heap'd the board.

Meantime they heard, soft circling in the sky
Sweet airs ascend, and heavenly minstrelsy
(For Phemius to the lyre attuned the strain):
Ulysses hearken'd, then address'd the swain:

"Well may this palace admiration claim,
Great and respondent to the master's fame!
Stage above stage the imperial structure stands,
Holds the chief honours, and the town commands:
High walls and battlements the courts inclose,
And the strong gates defy a host of foes.
Far other cares its dwellers now employ;
The throng'd assembly and the feast of joy:
I see the smokes of sacrifice aspire,
And hear (what graces every feast) the lyre."

Then thus Eumaeus: "Judge we which were best;
Amidst yon revellers a sudden guest
Choose you to mingle, while behind I stay?
Or I first entering introduce the way?
Wait for a space without, but wait not long;
This is the house of violence and wrong:
Some rude insult thy reverend age may bear;
For like their lawless lords the servants are."

"Just is, O friend! thy caution, and address'd
(Replied the chief, to no unheedful breast:)
The wrongs and injuries of base mankind
Fresh to my sense, and always in my mind.
The bravely-patient to no fortune yields:
On rolling oceans, and in fighting fields,
Storms have I pass'd, and many a stern debate;
And now in humbler scene submit to fate.
What cannot want? The best she will expose,
And I am learn'd in all her train of woes;
She fills with navies, hosts, and loud alarms,
The sea, the land, and shakes the world with arms!"

Thus, near the gates conferring as they drew,
Argus, the dog, his ancient master knew:
He not unconscious of the voice and tread,
Lifts to the sound his ear, and rears his head;
Bred by Ulysses, nourish'd at his board,
But, ah! not fated long to please his lord;
To him, his swiftness and his strength were vain;
The voice of glory call'd him o'er the main.
Till then in every sylvan chase renown'd,
With Argus, Argus, rung the woods around;
With him the youth pursued the goat or fawn,
Or traced the mazy leveret o'er the lawn.
Now left to man's ingratitude he lay,
Unhoused, neglected in the public way;
And where on heaps the rich manure was spread,
Obscene with reptiles, took his sordid bed.

He knew his lord; he knew, and strove to meet;
In vain he strove to crawl and kiss his feet;
Yet (all he could) his tail, his tears, his eyes,
Salute his master, and confess his joys.
Soft pity touch'd the mighty master's soul;
Adown his cheek a tear unbidden stole,
Stole unperceived: he turn'd his head and dried
The drop humane: then thus impassion'd cried:

"What noble beast in this abandon'd state
Lies here all helpless at Ulysses' gate?
His bulk and beauty speak no vulgar praise:
If, as he seems, he was in better days,
Some care his age deserves; or was he prized
For worthless beauty? therefore now despised;
Such dogs and men there are, mere things of state;
And always cherish'd by their friends, the great."

"Not Argus so, (Eumaeus thus rejoin'd,)
But served a master of a nobler kind,
Who, never, never shall behold him more!
Long, long since perish'd on a distant shore!
Oh had you seen him, vigorous, bold, and young,
Swift as a stag, and as a lion strong:
Him no fell savage on the plain withstood,
None 'scaped him bosom'd in the gloomy wood;
His eye how piercing, and his scent how true,
To wind the vapour on the tainted dew!
Such, when Ulysses left his natal coast:
Now years unnerve him, and his lord is lost!
The women keep the generous creature bare,
A sleek and idle race is all their care:
The master gone, the servants what restrains?
Or dwells humanity where riot reigns?
Jove fix'd it certain, that whatever day
Makes man a slave, takes half his worth away."

This said, the honest herdsman strode before;
The musing monarch pauses at the door:
The dog, whom Fate had granted to behold
His lord, when twenty tedious years had roll'd,
Takes a last look, and having seen him, dies;
So closed for ever faithful Argus' eyes!

And now Telemachus, the first of all,
Observed Eumaeus entering in the hall;
Distant he saw, across the shady dome;
Then gave a sign, and beckon'd him to come:
There stood an empty seat, where late was placed,
In order due, the steward of the feast,
(Who now was busied carving round the board,)
Eumaeus took, and placed it near his lord.
Before him instant was the banquet spread,
And the bright basket piled with loaves of bread.

Next came Ulysses lowly at the door,
A figure despicable, old, and poor.
In squalid vests, with many a gaping rent,
Propp'd or a staff, and trembling as he went.
Then, resting on the threshold of the gate,
Against a cypress pillar lean'd his weight
Smooth'd by the workman to a polish'd plane);
The thoughtful son beheld, and call'd his swain

"These viands, and this bread, Eumaeus! bear,
And let yon mendicant our plenty share:
And let him circle round the suitors' board,
And try the bounty of each gracious lord.
Bold let him ask, encouraged thus by me:
How ill, alas! do want and shame agree!"

His lord's command the faithful servant bears:
The seeming beggar answers with his prayers:
"Bless'd be Telemachus! in every deed
Inspire him. Jove! in every wish succeed!"
This said, the portion from his son convey'd
With smiles receiving on his scrip he laid.
Long has the minstrel swept the sounding wire,
He fed, and ceased when silence held the lyre.
Soon as the suitors from the banquet rose,
Minerva prompts the man of mighty woes
To tempt their bounties with a suppliant's art,
And learn the generous from the ignoble heart
(Not but his soul, resentful as humane,
Dooms to full vengeance all the offending train);
With speaking eyes, and voice of plaintive sound,
Humble he moves, imploring all around.
The proud feel pity, and relief bestow,
With such an image touch'd of human woe;
Inquiring all, their wonder they confess,
And eye the man, majestic in distress.

While thus they gaze and question with their eyes,
The bold Melanthius to their thought replies:
"My lords! this stranger of gigantic port
The good Eumaeus usher'd to your court.
Full well I mark'd the features of his face,
Though all unknown his clime, or noble race."

"And is this present, swineherd! of thy band?
Bring'st thou these vagrants to infest the land?
(Returns Antinous with retorted eye)
Objects uncouth, to check the genial joy.
Enough of these our court already grace;
Of giant stomach, and of famish'd face.
Such guests Eumaeus to his country brings,
To share our feast, and lead the life of kings."

To whom the hospitable swain rejoins:
"Thy passion, prince, belies thy knowing mind.
Who calls, from distant nations to his own,
The poor, distinguish'd by their wants alone?
Round the wide world are sought those men divine
Who public structures raise, or who design;
Those to whose eyes the gods their ways reveal,
Or bless with salutary arts to heal;
But chief to poets such respect belongs,
By rival nations courted for their songs;
These states invite, and mighty kings admire,
Wide as the sun displays his vital fire.
It is not so with want! how few that feed
A wretch unhappy, merely for his need!
Unjust to me, and all that serve the state,
To love Ulysses is to raise thy hate.
For me, suffice the approbation won
Of my great mistress, and her godlike son."

To him Telemachus: "No more incense
The man by nature prone to insolence:
Injurious minds just answers but provoke"--
Then turning to Antinous, thus he spoke:
"Thanks to thy care! whose absolute command
Thus drives the stranger from our court and land.
Heaven bless its owner with a better mind!
From envy free, to charity inclined.
This both Penelope and I afford:
Then, prince! be bounteous of Ulysses' board.
To give another's is thy hand so slow?
So much more sweet to spoil than to bestow?"

"Whence, great Telemachus! this lofty strain?
(Antinous cries with insolent disdain):
Portions like mine if every suitor gave,
Our walls this twelvemonth should not see the slave."

He spoke, and lifting high above the board
His ponderous footstool, shook it at his lord.
The rest with equal hand conferr'd the bread:
He fill'd his scrip, and to the threshold sped;
But first before Antinous stopp'd, and said:
"Bestow, my friend! thou dost not seem the worst
Of all the Greeks, but prince-like and the first;
Then, as in dignity, be first in worth,
And I shall praise thee through the boundless earth.
Once I enjoy'd in luxury of state
Whate'er gives man the envied name of great;
Wealth, servants, friends, were mine in better days
And hospitality was then my praise;
In every sorrowing soul I pour'd delight,
And poverty stood smiling in my sight.
But Jove, all-governing, whose only will
Determines fate, and mingles good with ill,
Sent me (to punish my pursuit of gain)
With roving pirates o'er the Egyptian main
By Egypt's silver flood our ships we moor;
Our spies commission'd straight the coast explore;
But impotent of mind, the lawless will
The country ravage, and the natives kill.
The spreading clamour to their city flies,
And horse and foot in mingled tumults rise:
The reddening dawn reveals the hostile fields,
Horrid with bristly spears, and gleaming shields:
Jove thunder'd on their side: our guilty head
We turn'd to flight; the gathering vengeance spread
On all parts round, and heaps on heaps lay dead.
Some few the foe in servitude detain;
Death ill exchanged for bondage and for pain!
Unhappy me a Cyprian took aboard,
And gave to Dmetor, Cyprus' haughty lord:
Hither, to 'scape his chains, my course I steer,
Still cursed by Fortune, and insulted here!"

To whom Antinous thus his rage express'd:
"What god has plagued us with this gourmand guest?
Unless at distance, wretch! thou keep behind,
Another isle, than Cyprus more unkind,
Another Egypt shalt thou quickly find.
From all thou begg'st, a bold audacious slave;
Nor all can give so much as thou canst crave.
Nor wonder I, at such profusion shown;
Shameless they give, who give what's not their own."

The chief, retiring: "Souls, like that in thee,
Ill suits such forms of grace and dignity.
Nor will that hand to utmost need afford
The smallest portion of a wasteful board,
Whose luxury whole patrimonies sweeps,
Yet starving want, amidst the riot, weeps."

The haughty suitor with resentment burns,
And, sourly smiling, this reply returns:
"Take that, ere yet thou quit this princely throng;
And dumb for ever be thy slanderous tongue!"
He said, and high the whirling tripod flung.
His shoulder-blade received the ungentle shock;
He stood, and moved not, like a marble rock;
But shook his thoughtful head, nor more complain'd,
Sedate of soul, his character sustain'd,
And inly form'd revenge; then back withdrew:
Before his feet the well fill'd scrip he threw,
And thus with semblance mild address'd the crew:

"May what I speak your princely minds approve,
Ye peers and rivals in this noble love!
Not for the hurt I grieve, but for the cause.
If, when the sword our country's quarrel draws,
Or if, defending what is justly dear,
From Mars impartial some broad wound we bear,
The generous motive dignifies the scar.
But for mere want, how hard to suffer wrong!
Want brings enough of other ills along!
Yet, if injustice never be secure,
If fiends revenge, and gods assert the poor,
Death shall lay low the proud aggressor's head,
And make the dust Antinous' bridal bed."

"Peace, wretch! and eat thy bread without offence
(The suitor cried), or force shall drag thee hence,
Scourge through the public street, and cast thee there,
A mangled carcase for the hounds to tear."

His furious deed the general anger moved,
All, even the worst, condemn'd; and some reproved.
"Was ever chief for wars like these renown'd?
Ill fits the stranger and the poor to wound.
Unbless'd thy hand! if in this low disguise
Wander, perhaps, some inmate of the skies;
They (curious oft of mortal actions) deign
In forms like these to round the earth and main,
Just and unjust recording in their mind,
And with sure eyes inspecting all mankind."

Telemachus, absorb'd in thought severe,
Nourish'd deep anguish, though he shed no tear;
But the dark brow of silent sorrow shook:
While thus his mother to her virgins spoke:

"On him and his may the bright god of day
That base, inhospitable blow repay!"
The nurse replies: "If Jove receives my prayer,
Not one survives to breathe to-morrow's air."

"All, all are foes, and mischief is their end;
Antinous most to gloomy death a friend
(Replies the queen): the stranger begg'd their grace,
And melting pity soften'd every face;
From every other hand redress he found,
But fell Antinous answer'd with a wound."
Amidst her maids thus spoke the prudent queen,
Then bade Eumaeus call the pilgrim in.
"Much of the experienced man I long to hear,
If or his certain eye, or listening ear,
Have learn'd the fortunes of my wandering lord?"
Thus she, and good Eumaeus took the word:

"A private audience if thy grace impart,
The stranger's words may ease the royal heart.
His sacred eloquence in balm distils,
And the soothed heart with secret pleasure fills.
Three days have spent their beams, three nights have run
Their silent journey, since his tale begun,
Unfinish'd yet; and yet I thirst to hear!
As when some heaven-taught poet charms the ear
(Suspending sorrow with celestial strain
Breathed from the gods to soften human pain)
Time steals away with unregarded wing,
And the soul hears him, though he cease to sing

"Ulysses late he saw, on Cretan ground
(His fathers guest), for Minos' birth renown'd.
He now but waits the wind to waft him o'er,
With boundless treasure, from Thesprotia's shore."

To this the queen: "The wanderer let me hear,
While yon luxurious race indulge their cheer,
Devour the grazing ox, and browsing goat,
And turn my generous vintage down their throat.
For where's an arm, like thine, Ulysses! strong,
To curb wild riot, and to punish wrong?"

She spoke. Telemachus then sneezed aloud;
Constrain'd, his nostril echoed through the crowd.
The smiling queen the happy omen bless'd:

"So may these impious fall, by Fate oppress'd!"
Then to Eumaeus: "Bring the stranger, fly!
And if my questions meet a true reply,
Graced with a decent robe he shall retire,
A gift in season which his wants require."

Thus spoke Penelope. Eumaeus flies
In duteous haste, and to Ulysses cries:
"The queen invites thee, venerable guest!
A secret instinct moves her troubled breast,
Of her long absent lord from thee to gain
Some light, and soothe her soul's eternal pain.
If true, if faithful thou, her grateful mind
Of decent robes a present has design'd:
So finding favour in the royal eye,
Thy other wants her subjects shall supply."

"Fair truth alone (the patient man replied)
My words shall dictate, and my lips shall guide.
To him, to me, one common lot was given,
In equal woes, alas! involved by Heaven.
Much of his fates I know; but check'd by fear
I stand; the hand of violence is here:
Here boundless wrongs the starry skies invade,
And injured suppliants seek in vain for aid.
Let for a space the pensive queen attend,
Nor claim my story till the sun descend;
Then in such robes as suppliants may require,
Composed and cheerful by the genial fire,
When loud uproar and lawless riot cease,
Shall her pleased ear receive my words in peace."

Swift to the queen returns the gentle swain:
"And say (she cries), does fear or shame detain
The cautious stranger? With the begging kind
Shame suits but ill." Eumaeus thus rejoin'd:

"He only asks a more propitious hour,
And shuns (who would not?) wicked men in power;
At evening mild (meet season to confer)
By turns to question, and by turns to hear."

"Whoe'er this guest (the prudent queen replies)
His every step and every thought is wise.
For men like these on earth he shall not find
In all the miscreant race of human kind."
Thus she. Eumaeus all her words attends,
And, parting, to the suitor powers descends;
There seeks Telemachus, and thus apart
In whispers breathes the fondness of his heart:

"The time, my lord, invites me to repair
Hence to the lodge; my charge demands my care.
These sons of murder thirst thy life to take;
O guard it, guard it, for thy servant's sake!"

"Thanks to my friend (he cries): but now the hour
Of night draws on, go seek the rural bower:
But first refresh: and at the dawn of day
Hither a victim to the gods convey.
Our life to Heaven's immortal powers we trust,
Safe in their care, for Heaven protects the just."

Observant of his voice, Eumaeus sate
And fed recumbent on a chair of state.
Then instant rose, and as he moved along,
'Twas riot all amid the suitor throng,
They feast, they dance, and raise the mirthful song
Till now, declining towards the close of day,
The sun obliquely shot his dewy ray.

While fix'd in thought the pensive hero sate,
A mendicant approach'd the royal gate;
A surly vagrant of the giant kind,
The stain of manhood, of a coward mind:
From feast to feast, insatiate to devour,
He flew, attendant on the genial hour.
Him on his mother's knees, when babe he lay,
She named Arnaeus on his natal day:
But Irus his associates call'd the boy,
Practised the common messenger to fly;
Irus, a name expressive of the employ.

From his own roof, with meditated blows,
He strove to drive the man of mighty woes:

"Hence, dotard! hence, and timely speed thy way,
Lest dragg'd in vengeance thou repent thy stay;
See how with nods assent yon princely train!
But honouring age, in mercy I refrain:
In peace away! lest, if persuasions fail,
This arm with blows more eloquent prevail."
To whom, with stern regard: "O insolence,
Indecently to rail without offence!
What bounty gives without a rival share;
I ask, what harms not thee, to breathe this air:
Alike on alms we both precarious live:
And canst thou envy when the great relieve?
Know, from the bounteous heavens all riches flow,
And what man gives, the gods by man bestow;
Proud as thou art, henceforth no more be proud,
Lest I imprint my vengeance in thy blood;
Old as I am, should once my fury burn,
How would'st thou fly, nor e'en in thought return!"

"Mere woman-glutton! (thus the churl replied;)
A tongue so flippant, with a throat so wide!
Why cease I gods! to dash those teeth away,
Like some wild boar's, that, greedy of his prey,
Uproots the bearded corn? Rise, try the fight,
Gird well thy loins, approach, and feel my might:
Sure of defeat, before the peers engage:
Unequal fight, when youth contends with age!"

Thus in a wordy war their tongues display
More fierce intents, preluding to the fray;
Antinous hears, and in a jovial vein,
Thus with loud laughter to the suitor train:

"This happy day in mirth, my friends, employ,
And lo! the gods conspire to crown our joy;
See ready for the fight, and hand to hand,
Yon surly mendicants contentious stand:
Why urge we not to blows!" Well pleased they spring
Swift from their seats, and thickening form a ring.

To whom Antinous: "Lo! enrich'd with blood,
A kid's well-fatted entrails (tasteful food)
On glowing embers lie; on him bestow
The choicest portion who subdues his foe;
Grant him unrivall'd in these walls to stay,
The sole attendant on the genial day."

The lords applaud: Ulysses then with art,
And fears well-feign'd, disguised his dauntless heart.

"Worn as I am with age, decay'd with woe;
Say, is it baseness to decline the foe?
Hard conflict! when calamity and age
With vigorous youth, unknown to cares, engage!
Yet, fearful of disgrace, to try the day
Imperious hunger bids, and I obey;
But swear, impartial arbiters of right,
Swear to stand neutral, while we cope in fight."

The peers assent: when straight his sacred head
Telemachus upraised, and sternly said:
"Stranger, if prompted to chastise the wrong
Of this bold insolent, confide, be strong!
The injurious Greek that dares attempt a blow,
That instant makes Telemachus his foe;
And these my friends shall guard the sacred ties
Of hospitality, for they are wise."

Then, girding his strong loins, the king prepares
To close in combat, and his body bares;
Broad spread his shoulders, and his nervous thighs
By just degrees, like well-turn'd columns, rise
Ample his chest, his arms are round and long,
And each strong joint Minerva knits more strong
(Attendant on her chief): the suitor-crowd
With wonder gaze, and gazing speak aloud:
"Irus! alas! shall Irus be no more?
Black fate impends, and this the avenging hour!
Gods! how his nerves a matchless strength proclaim,
Swell o'er his well-strong limbs, and brace his frame!"

Then pale with fears, and sickening at the sight;
They dragg'd the unwilling Irus to the fight;
From his blank visage fled the coward blood,
And his flesh trembled as aghast he stood.

"O that such baseness should disgrace the light?
O hide it, death, in everlasting night!
(Exclaims Antinous;) can a vigorous foe
Meanly decline to combat age and woe?
But hear me wretch! if recreant in the fray
That huge bulk yield this ill-contested day,
Instant thou sail'st, to Eschetus resign'd;
A tyrant, fiercest of the tyrant kind,
Who casts thy mangled ears and nose a prey
To hungry dogs, and lops the man away."

While with indignant scorn he sternly spoke,
In every joint the trembling Irus shook.
Now front to front each frowning champion stands,
And poises high in air his adverse hands.
The chief yet doubts, or to the shades below
To fell the giant at one vengeful blow,
Or save his life, and soon his life to save
The king resolves, for mercy sways the brave
That instant Irus his huge arm extends,
Full on his shoulder the rude weight descends;
The sage Ulysses, fearful to disclose
The hero latent in the man of woes,
Check'd half his might; yet rising to the stroke,
His jawbone dash'd, the crashing jawbone broke:
Down dropp'd he stupid from the stunning wound;
His feet extended quivering, beat the ground;
His mouth and nostrils spout a purple flood;
His teeth, all shatter'd, rush inmix'd with blood.

The peers transported, as outstretch'd he lies,
With bursts of laughter rend the vaulted skies;
Then dragg'd along, all bleeding from the wound,
His length of carcase trailing prints the ground:
Raised on his feet, again he reels, he falls,
Till propp'd, reclining on the palace walls:
Then to his hand a staff the victor gave,
And thus with just reproach address'd the slave:
"There terrible, affright with dogs, and reign
A dreaded tyrant o'er the bestial train!
But mercy to the poor and stranger show,
Lest Heaven in vengeance send some mightier woe."

Scornful he spoke, and o'er his shoulder flung
The broad-patch'd scrip in tatters hung
Ill join'd, and knotted to a twisted thong.
Then, turning short, disdain'd a further stay;
But to the palace measured back the way.
There, as he rested gathering in a ring,
The peers with smiles address'd their unknown king:
"Stranger, may Jove and all the aerial powers
With every blessing crown thy happy hours!
Our freedom to thy prowess'd arm we owe
From bold intrusion of thy coward foe:
Instant the flying sail the slave shall wing
To Eschetus, the monster of a king."

While pleased he hears, Antinous bears the food,
A kid's well-fatted entrails, rich with blood;
The bread from canisters of shining mould
Amphinomus; and wines that laugh in gold:
"And oh! (he mildly cries) may Heaven display
A beam of glory o'er thy future day!
Alas, the brave too oft is doom'd to bear
The gripes of poverty and stings of care."

To whom with thought mature the king replies:
"The tongue speaks wisely, when the soul is wise:
Such was thy father! in imperial state,
Great without vice, that oft attends the great;
Nor from the sire art thou, the son, declin'd;
Then hear my words, and grace them in thy mind!
Of all that breathes, or grovelling creeps on earth,
Most man in vain! calamitous by birth:
To-day, with power elate, in strength he blooms;
The haughty creature on that power presumes:
Anon from Heaven a sad reverse he feels:
Untaught to bear, 'gainst Heaven the wretch rebels.
For man is changeful, as his bliss or woe!
Too high when prosperous, when distress'd too low.
There was a day, when with the scornful great
I swell'd in pomp and arrogance of state;
Proud of the power that to high birth belongs;
And used that power to justify my wrongs.
Then let not man be proud; but firm of mind,
Bear the best humbly; and the worst resign'd;
Be dumb when Heaven afflicts! unlike yon train
Of haughty spoilers, insolently vain;
Who make their queen and all her wealth a prey:
But vengeance and Ulysses wing their way.
O may'st thou, favour'd by some guardian power,
Far, far be distant in that deathful hour!
For sure I am, if stern Ulysses breathe,
These lawless riots end in blood and death."

Then to the gods the rosy juice he pours,
And the drain'd goblet to the chief restores.
Stung to the soul, o'ercast with holy dread,
He shook the graceful honours of his head;
His boding mind the future woe forestalls,
In vain! by great Telemachus he falls,
For Pallas seals his doom: all sad he turns
To join the peers; resumes his throne, and mourns.

Meanwhile Minerva with instinctive fires
Thy soul, Penelope, from Heaven inspires;
With flattering hopes the suitors to betray,
And seem to meet, yet fly, the bridal day:
Thy husband's wonder, and thy son's to raise;
And crown the mother and the wife with praise.
Then, while the streaming sorrow dims her eyes,
Thus, with a transient smile, the matron cries:

"Eurynome! to go where riot reigns
I feel an impulse, though my soul disdains;
To my loved son the snares of death to show,
And in the traitor friend, unmask the foe;
Who, smooth of tongue, in purpose insincere,
Hides fraud in smiles, while death is ambush'd there."

"Go, warn thy son, nor be the warning vain
(Replied the sagest of the royal train);
But bathed, anointed, and adorn'd, descend;
Powerful of charms, bid every grace attend;
The tide of flowing tears awhile suppress;
Tears but indulge the sorrow, not repress.
Some joy remains: to thee a son is given,
Such as, in fondness, parents ask of Heaven."

"Ah me! forbear!" returns the queen, "forbear,
Oh! talk not, talk not of vain beauty's care;
No more I bathe, since he no longer sees
Those charms, for whom alone I wish to please.
The day that bore Ulysses from this coast
Blasted the little bloom these cheeks could boast.
But instant bid Autonoe descend,
Instant Hippodame our steps attend;
Ill suits it female virtue, to be seen
Alone, indecent, in the walks of men."

Then while Eurynome the mandate bears,
From heaven Minerva shoots with guardian cares;
O'er all her senses, as the couch she press'd,
She pours, a pleasing, deep and death-like rest,
With every beauty every feature arms,
Bids her cheeks glow, and lights up all her charms;
In her love-darting eyes awakes the fires
(Immortal gifts! to kindle soft desires);
From limb to limb an air majestic sheds,
And the pure ivory o'er her bosom spreads.
Such Venus shines, when with a measured bound
She smoothly gliding swims the harmonious round,
When with the Graces in the dance she moves,
And fires the gazing gods with ardent loves.

Then to the skies her flight Minerva bends,
And to the queen the damsel train descends;
Waked at their steps, her flowing eyes unclose;
The tears she wipes, and thus renews her woes:
"Howe'er 'tis well that sleep awhile can free,
With soft forgetfulness a wretch like me;
Oh! were it given to yield this transient breath,
Send, O Diana! send the sleep of death!
Why must I waste a tedious life in tears,
Nor bury in the silent grave my cares?
O my Ulysses! ever honour'd name!
For thee I mourn till death dissolves my frame."

Thus wailing, slow and sadly she descends,
On either band a damsel train attends:
Full where the dome its shining valves expands,
Radiant before the gazing peers she stands;
A veil translucent o'er her brow display'd,
Her beauty seems, and only seems, to shade:
Sudden she lightens in their dazzled eyes,
And sudden flames in every bosom rise;
They send their eager souls with every look.
Till silence thus the imperial matron broke:

"O why! my son, why now no more appears
That warmth of soul that urged thy younger years?
Thy riper days no growing worth impart,
A man in stature, still a boy in heart!
Thy well-knit frame unprofitably strong,
Speaks thee a hero, from a hero sprung:
But the just gods in vain those gifts bestow,
O wise alone in form, and grave in show!
Heavens! could a stranger feel oppression's hand
Beneath thy roof, and couldst thou tamely stand!
If thou the stranger's righteous cause decline
His is the sufferance, but the shame is thine."

To whom, with filial awe, the prince returns:
"That generous soul with just resentment burns;
Yet, taught by time, my heart has learn'd to glow
For others' good, and melt at others' woe;
But, impotent those riots to repel,
I bear their outrage, though my soul rebel;
Helpless amid the snares of death I tread,
And numbers leagued in impious union dread;
But now no crime is theirs: this wrong proceeds
From Irus, and the guilty Irus bleeds.
Oh would to Jove! or her whose arms display
The shield of Jove, or him who rules the day!
That yon proud suitors, who licentious tread
These courts, within these courts like Irus bled:
Whose loose head tottering, as with wine oppress'd,
Obliquely drops, and nodding knocks his breast;
Powerless to move, his staggering feet deny
The coward wretch the privilege to fly."

Then to the queen Eurymachus replies:
"O justly loved, and not more fair than wise!
Should Greece through all her hundred states survey
Thy finish'd charms, all Greece would own thy sway
In rival crowds contest the glorious prize.
Dispeopling realms to gaze upon thy eyes:
O woman! loveliest of the lovely kind,
In body perfect, and complete in mind."

"Ah me! (returns the queen) when from this shore
Ulysses sail'd, then beauty was no more!
The gods decreed these eyes no more should keep
Their wonted grace, but only serve to weep.
Should he return, whate'er my beauties prove,
My virtues last; my brightest charm is love.
Now, grief, thou all art mine! the gods o'ercast
My soul with woes, that long, ah long must last!
Too faithfully my heart retains the day
That sadly tore my royal lord away:
He grasp'd my hand, and, 'O, my spouse! I leave
Thy arms (he cried), perhaps to find a grave:
Fame speaks the Trojans bold; they boast the skill
To give the feather'd arrow wings to kill,
To dart the spear, and guide the rushing car
With dreadful inroad through the walks of war.
My sentence is gone forth, and 'tis decreed
Perhaps by righteous Heaven that I must bleed!
My father, mother, all I trust to three;
To them, to them, transfer the love of me:
But, when my son grows man, the royal sway
Resign, and happy be thy bridal day!'
Such were his words; and Hymen now prepares
To light his torch, and give me up to cares;
The afflictive hand of wrathful Jove to bear:
A wretch the most complete that breathes the air!
Fall'n e'en below the rights to woman due!
Careless to please, with insolence ye woo!
The generous lovers, studious to succeed,
Bid their whole herds and flocks in banquets bleed;
By precious gifts the vow sincere display:
You, only you, make her ye love your prey."

Well-pleased Ulysses hears his queen deceive
The suitor-train, and raise a thirst to give:
False hopes she kindles, but those hopes betray,
And promise, yet elude, the bridal day.

While yet she speaks, the gay Antinous cries:
"Offspring of kings, and more than woman wise!
'Tis right; 'tis man's prerogative to give,
And custom bids thee without shame receive;
Yet never, never, from thy dome we move,
Till Hymen lights the torch of spousal love."

The peers despatch'd their heralds to convey
The gifts of love; with speed they take the way.
A robe Antinous gives of shining dyes,
The varying hues in gay confusion rise
Rich from the artist's hand! Twelve clasps of gold
Close to the lessening waist the vest infold!
Down from the swelling loins the vest unbound
Floats in bright waves redundant o'er the ground,
A bracelet rich with gold, with amber gay,
That shot effulgence like the solar ray,
Eurymachus presents: and ear-rings bright,
With triple stars, that casts a trembling light.
Pisander bears a necklace wrought with art:
And every peer, expressive of his heart,
A gift bestows: this done, the queen ascends,
And slow behind her damsel train attends.

Then to the dance they form the vocal strain,
Till Hesperus leads forth the starry train;
And now he raises, as the daylight fades,
His golden circlet in the deepening shades:
Three vases heap'd with copious fires display
O'er all the palace a fictitious day;
From space to space the torch wide-beaming burns,
And sprightly damsels trim the rays by turns.

To whom the king: "Ill suits your sex to stay
Alone with men! ye modest maids, away!
Go, with the queen; the spindle guide; or cull
(The partners of her cares) the silver wool;
Be it my task the torches to supply
E'en till the morning lamp adorns the sky;
E'en till the morning, with unwearied care,
Sleepless I watch; for I have learn'd to bear."

Scornful they heard: Melantho, fair and young,
(Melantho, from the loins of Dolius sprung,
Who with the queen her years an infant led,
With the soft fondness of a daughter bred,)
Chiefly derides: regardless of the cares
Her queen endures, polluted joys she shares
Nocturnal with Eurymachus: with eyes
That speak disdain, the wanton thus replies:
"Oh! whither wanders thy distemper'd brain,
Thou bold intruder on a princely train?
Hence, to the vagrants' rendezvous repair;
Or shun in some black forge the midnight air.
Proceeds this boldness from a turn of soul,
Or flows licentious from the copious bowl?
Is it that vanquish'd Irus swells thy mind?
A foe may meet thee of a braver kind,
Who, shortening with a storm of blows thy stay,
Shall send thee howling all in blood away!"

To whom with frowns: "O impudent in wrong!
Thy lord shall curb that insolence of tongue;
Know, to Telemachus I tell the offence;
The scourge, the scourge shall lash thee into sense."

With conscious shame they hear the stern rebuke,
Nor longer durst sustain the sovereign look.

Then to the servile task the monarch turns
His royal hands: each torch refulgent burns
With added day: meanwhile in museful mood,
Absorb'd in thought, on vengeance fix'd he stood.
And now the martial maid, by deeper wrongs
To rouse Ulysses, points the suitors' tongues:
Scornful of age, to taunt the virtuous man,
Thoughtless and gay, Eurymachus began:

"Hear me (he cries), confederates and friends!
Some god, no doubt, this stranger kindly sends;
The shining baldness of his head survey,
It aids our torchlight, and reflects the ray."

Then to the king that levell'd haughty Troy:
"Say, if large hire can tempt thee to employ
Those hands in work; to tend the rural trade,
To dress the walk, and form the embowering shade.
So food and raiment constant will I give:
But idly thus thy soul prefers to live,
And starve by strolling, not by work to thrive."

To whom incensed: "Should we, O prince, engage
In rival tasks beneath the burning rage
Of summer suns; were both constrain'd to wield
Foodless the scythe along the burden'd field;
Or should we labour while the ploughshare wounds,
With steers of equal strength, the allotted grounds,
Beneath my labours, how thy wondering eyes
Might see the sable field at once arise!
Should Jove dire war unloose, with spear and shield,
And nodding helm, I tread the ensanguined field,
Fierce in the van: then wouldst thou, wouldst thou,--say,--
Misname me glutton, in that glorious day?
No, thy ill-judging thoughts the brave disgrace
'Tis thou injurious art, not I am base.
Proud to seem brave among a coward train!
But now, thou art not valorous, but vain.
God! should the stern Ulysses rise in might,
These gates would seem too narrow for thy flight."

While yet he speaks, Eurymachus replies,
With indignation flashing from his eyes:

"Slave, I with justice might deserve the wrong,
Should I not punish that opprobrious tongue.
Irreverent to the great, and uncontroll'd,
Art thou from wine, or innate folly, bold?
Perhaps these outrages from Irus flow,
A worthless triumph o'er a worthless foe!"

He said, and with full force a footstool threw;
Whirl'd from his arm, with erring rage it flew:
Ulysses, cautious of the vengeful foe,
Stoops to the ground, and disappoints the blow.
Not so a youth, who deals the goblet round,
Full on his shoulder it inflicts a wound;
Dash'd from his hand the sounding goblet flies,
He shrieks, he reels, he falls, and breathless lies.
Then wild uproar and clamour mount the sky,
Till mutual thus the peers indignant cry:
"Oh had this stranger sunk to realms beneath,
To the black realms of darkness and of death,
Ere yet he trod these shores! to strife he draws
Peer against peer; and what the weighty cause?
A vagabond! for him the great destroy,
In vile ignoble jars, the feast of joy."

To whom the stern Telemachus uprose;
"Gods! what wild folly from the goblet flows!
Whence this unguarded openness of soul,
But from the license of the copious bowl?
Or Heaven delusion sends: but hence away!
Force I forbear, and without force obey."

Silent, abash'd, they hear the stern rebuke,
Till thus Amphinomus the silence broke:

"True are his words, and he whom truth offends,
Not with Telemachus, but truth contends;
Let not the hand of violence invade
The reverend stranger, or the spotless maid;
Retire we hence, but crown with rosy wine
The flowing goblet to the powers divine!
Guard he his guest beneath whose roof he stands:
This justice, this the social rite demands."

The peers assent: the goblet Mulius crown'd
With purple juice, and bore in order round:
Each peer successive his libation pours
To the blest gods who fill'd the ethereal bowers:
Then swill'd with wine, with noise the crowds obey,
And rushing forth, tumultuous reel away.

Consulting secret with the blue-eyed maid,
Still in the dome divine Ulysses stay'd:
Revenge mature for act inflamed his breast;
And thus the son the fervent sire address'd:

"Instant convey those steely stores of war
To distant rooms, disposed with secret care:
The cause demanded by the suitor-train,
To soothe their fears, a specious reason feign:
Say, since Ulysses left his natal coast,
Obscene with smoke, their beamy lustre lost,
His arms deform the roof they wont adorn:
From the glad walls inglorious lumber torn.
Suggest, that Jove the peaceful thought inspired,
Lest they, by sight of swords to fury fired,
Dishonest wounds, or violence of soul,
Defame the bridal feast and friendly bowl."

The prince, obedient to the sage command,
To Euryclea thus: "The female band
In their apartments keep; secure the doors;
These swarthy arms among the covert stores
Are seemlier hid; my thoughtless youth they blame,
Imbrown'd with vapour of the smouldering flame."

"In happier hour (pleased Euryclea cries),
Tutour'd by early woes, grow early wise;
Inspect with sharpen'd sight, and frugal care,
Your patrimonial wealth, a prudent heir.
But who the lighted taper will provide
(The female train retired) your toils to guide?"

"Without infringing hospitable right,
This guest (he cried) shall bear the guiding light:
I cheer no lazy vagrants with repast;
They share the meal that earn it ere they taste."

He said: from female ken she straight secures
The purposed deed, and guards the bolted doors:
Auxiliar to his son, Ulysses bears
The plumy-crested helms and pointed spears,
With shields indented deep in glorious wars.
Minerva viewless on her charge attends,
And with her golden lamp his toil befriends.
Not such the sickly beams, which unsincere
Gild the gross vapour of this nether sphere!
A present deity the prince confess'd,
And wrapp'd with ecstasy the sire address'd:

"What miracle thus dazzles with surprise!
Distinct in rows the radiant columns rise;
The walls, where'er my wondering sight I turn,
And roofs, amidst a blaze of glory burn!
Some visitant of pure ethereal race
With his bright presence deigns the dome to grace."

"Be calm (replies the sire); to none impart,
But oft revolve the vision in thy heart:
Celestials, mantled in excess of light,
Can visit unapproach'd by mortal sight.
Seek thou repose: whilst here I sole remain,
To explore the conduct of the female train:
The pensive queen, perchance, desires to know
The series of my toils, to soothe her woe."

With tapers flaming day his train attends,
His bright alcove the obsequious youth ascends:
Soft slumberous shades his drooping eyelids close,
Till on her eastern throne Aurora glows.

Whilst, forming plans of death, Ulysses stay'd,
In counsel secret with the martial maid,
Attendant nymphs in beauteous order wait
The queen, descending from her bower of state.
Her cheeks the warmer blush of Venus wear,
Chasten'd with coy Diana's pensive air.
An ivory seat with silver ringlets graced,
By famed Icmalius wrought, the menials placed:
With ivory silver'd thick the footstool shone,
O'er which the panther's various hide was thrown.
The sovereign seat with graceful air she press'd;
To different tasks their toil the nymphs address'd:
The golden goblets some, and some restored
From stains of luxury the polish'd board:
These to remove the expiring embers came,
While those with unctuous fir foment the flame.

'Twas then Melantho with imperious mien
Renew'd the attack, incontinent of spleen:
"Avaunt (she cried), offensive to my sight!
Deem not in ambush here to lurk by night,
Into the woman-state asquint to pry;
A day-devourer, and an evening spy!
Vagrant, begone! before this blazing brand
Shall urge"--and waved it hissing in her hand.

The insulted hero rolls his wrathful eyes
And "Why so turbulent of soul? (he cries;)
Can these lean shrivell'd limbs, unnerved with age,
These poor but honest rags, enkindle rage?
In crowds, we wear the badge of hungry fate:
And beg, degraded from superior state!
Constrain'd a rent-charge on the rich I live;
Reduced to crave the good I once could give:
A palace, wealth, and slaves, I late possess'd,
And all that makes the great be call'd the bless'd:
My gate, an emblem of my open soul,
Embraced the poor, and dealt a bounteous dole.
Scorn not the sad reverse, injurious maid!
'Tis Jove's high will, and be his will obey'd!
Nor think thyself exempt: that rosy prime
Must share the general doom of withering time:
To some new channel soon the changeful tide
Of royal grace the offended queen may guide;
And her loved lord unplume thy towering pride.
Or, were he dead, 'tis wisdom to beware:
Sweet blooms the prince beneath Apollo's care;
Your deeds with quick impartial eye surveys,
Potent to punish what he cannot praise."

Her keen reproach had reach'd the sovereign's ear:
"Loquacious insolent! (she cries,) forbear;
To thee the purpose of my soul I told;
Venial discourse, unblamed, with him to hold;
The storied labours of my wandering lord,
To soothe my grief he haply may record:
Yet him, my guest, thy venom'd rage hath stung;
Thy head shall pay the forfeit of thy tongue!
But thou on whom my palace cares depend,
Eurynome, regard the stranger-friend:
A seat, soft spread with furry spoils, prepare;
Due-distant for us both to speak, and hear."

The menial fair obeys with duteous haste:
A seat adorn'd with furry spoils she placed:
Due-distant for discourse the hero sate;
When thus the sovereign from her chair of state:

"Reveal, obsequious to my first demand,
Thy name, thy lineage, and thy natal land."

He thus: "O queen! whose far-resounding fame
Is bounded only by the starry frame,
Consummate pattern of imperial sway,
Whose pious rule a warlike race obey!
In wavy gold thy summer vales are dress'd;
Thy autumns bind with copious fruit oppress'd:
With flocks and herds each grassy plain is stored;
And fish of every fin thy seas afford:
Their affluent joys the grateful realms confess;
And bless the power that still delights to bless,
Gracious permit this prayer, imperial dame!
Forbear to know my lineage, or my name:
Urge not this breast to heave, these eyes to weep;
In sweet oblivion let my sorrows sleep!
My woes awaked, will violate your ear,
And to this gay censorious train appear
A whiny vapour melting in a tear."

"Their gifts the gods resumed (the queen rejoin'd),
Exterior grace, and energy of mind,
When the dear partner of my nuptial joy,
Auxiliar troops combined, to conquer Troy.
My lord's protecting hand alone would raise
My drooping verdure, and extend my praise!
Peers from the distant Samian shore resort:
Here with Dulichians join'd, besiege the court:
Zacynthus, green with ever-shady groves,
And Ithaca, presumptuous, boast their loves:
Obtruding on my choice a second lord,
They press the Hymenaean rite abhorr'd.
Misrule thus mingling with domestic cares,
I live regardless of my state affairs;
Receive no stranger-guest, no poor relieve;
But ever for my lord in secret grieve!--
This art, instinct by some celestial power,
I tried, elusive of the bridal hour:

"'Ye peers, (I cry,) who press to gain a heart,
Where dead Ulysses claims no future part;
Rebate your loves, each rival suit suspend,
Till this funeral web my labours end:
Cease, till to good Laertes I bequeath
A pall of state, the ornament of death.
For when to fate he bows, each Grecian dame
With just reproach were licensed to defame,
Should he, long honour'd in supreme command,
Want the last duties of a daughter's hand.'
The fiction pleased; their loves I long elude;
The night still ravell'd what the day renew'd:
Three years successful in my heart conceal'd,
My ineffectual fraud the fourth reveal'd:
Befriended by my own domestic spies,
The woof unwrought the suitor-train surprise.
From nuptial rites they now no more recede,
And fear forbids to falsify the brede.
My anxious parents urge a speedy choice,
And to their suffrage gain the filial voice.
For rule mature, Telemachus deplores
His dome dishonour'd, and exhausted stores--
But, stranger! as thy days seem full of fate,
Divide discourse, in turn thy birth relate:
Thy port asserts thee of distinguish'd race;
No poor unfather'd product of disgrace."

"Princess! (he cries,) renew'd by your command,
The dear remembrance of my native land
Of secret grief unseals the fruitful source;
Fond tears repeat their long-forgotten course!
So pays the wretch whom fate constrains to roam,
The dues of nature to his natal home!--
But inward on my soul let sorrow prey,
Your sovereign will my duty bids obey.

"Crete awes the circling waves, a fruitful soil!
And ninety cities crown the sea-born isle:
Mix'd with her genuine sons, adopted names
In various tongues avow their various claims:
Cydonians, dreadful with the bended yew,
And bold Pelasgi boast a native's due:
The Dorians, plumed amid the files of war,
Her foodful glebe with fierce Achaians share;
Cnossus, her capital of high command;
Where sceptred Minos with impartial hand
Divided right: each ninth revolving year,
By Jove received in council to confer.
His son Deucalion bore successive sway:
His son, who gave me first to view the day!
The royal bed an elder issue bless'd,
Idomeneus whom Ilion fields attest
Of matchless deeds: untrain'd to martial toil,
I lived inglorious in my native isle.
Studious of peace, and Aethon is my name.
'Twas then to Crete the great Ulysses came.
For elemental war, and wintry Jove,
From Malea's gusty cape his navy drove
To bright Lucina's fane; the shelfy coast
Where loud Amnisus in the deep is lost.
His vessel's moor'd (an incommodious port!)
The hero speeded to the Cnossian court:
Ardent the partner of his arms to find,
In leagues of long commutual friendship join'd.
Vain hope! ten suns had warm'd the western strand
Since my brave brother, with his Cretan band,
Had sail'd for Troy: but to the genial feast
My honour'd roof received the royal guest:
Beeves for his train the Cnossian peers assign,
A public treat, with jars of generous wine.
Twelve days while Boreas vex'd the aerial space,
My hospitable dome he deign'd to grace:
And when the north had ceased the stormy roar,
He wing'd his voyage to the Phrygian shore."

Thus the fam'd hero, perfected in wiles,
With fair similitude of truth beguiles
The queen's attentive ear: dissolved in woe,
From her bright eyes the tears unbounded flow,
As snows collected on the mountain freeze;
When milder regions breathe a vernal breeze,
The fleecy pile obeys the whispering gales,
Ends in a stream, and murmurs through the vales:
So, melting with the pleasing tale he told,
Down her fair cheek the copious torrent roll'd:
She to her present lord laments him lost,
And views that object which she wants the most,
Withering at heart to see the weeping fair,
His eyes look stern, and cast a gloomy stare;
Of horn the stiff relentless balls appear,
Or globes of iron fix'd in either sphere;
Firm wisdom interdicts the softening tear.
A speechless interval of grief ensues,
Till thus the queen the tender theme renews.

"Stranger! that e'er thy hospitable roof
Ulysses graced, confirm by faithful proof;
Delineate to my view my warlike lord,
His form, his habit, and his train record."

"'Tis hard (he cries,) to bring to sudden sight
Ideas that have wing'd their distant flight;
Rare on the mind those images are traced,
Whose footsteps twenty winters have defaced:
But what I can, receive.--In ample mode,
A robe of military purple flow'd
O'er all his frame: illustrious on his breast,
The double-clasping gold the king confess'd.
In the rich woof a hound, mosaic drawn,
Bore on full stretch, and seized a dappled fawn;
Deep in the neck his fangs indent their hold;
They pant and struggle in the moving gold.
Fine as a filmy web beneath it shone
A vest, that dazzled like a cloudless sun:
The female train who round him throng'd to gaze,
In silent wonder sigh'd unwilling praise.
A sabre, when the warrior press'd to part,
I gave, enamell'd with Vulcanian art:
A mantle purple-tinged, and radiant vest,
Dimension'd equal to his size, express'd
Affection grateful to my honour'd guest.
A favourite herald in his train I knew,
His visage solemn, sad of sable hue:
Short woolly curls o'erfleeced his bending head,
O'er which a promontory shoulder spread;
Eurybates; in whose large soul alone
Ulysses view'd an image of his own."

His speech the tempest of her grief restored;
In all he told she recognized her lord:
But when the storm was spent in plenteous showers,
A pause inspiriting her languish'd powers,
"O thou, (she cried,) whom first inclement Fate
Made welcome to my hospitable gate;
With all thy wants the name of poor shall end:
Henceforth live honour'd, my domestic friend!
The vest much envied on your native coast,
And regal robe with figured gold emboss'd,
In happier hours my artful hand employ'd,
When my loved lord this blissful bower enjoy'd:
The fall of Troy erroneous and forlorn
Doom'd to survive, and never to return!"

Then he, with pity touch'd: "O royal dame!
Your ever-anxious mind, and beauteous frame,
From the devouring rage of grief reclaim.
I not the fondness of your soul reprove
For such a lord! who crown'd your virgin love
With the dear blessing of a fair increase;
Himself adorn'd with more than mortal grace:
Yet while I speak the mighty woe suspend;
Truth forms my tale; to pleasing truth attend.
The royal object of your dearest care
Breathes in no distant clime the vital air:
In rich Thesprotia, and the nearer bound
Of Thessaly, his name I heard renown'd:
Without retinue, to that friendly shore
Welcomed with gifts of price, a sumless store!
His sacrilegious train, who dared to prey
On herds devoted to the god of day,
Were doom'd by Jove, and Phoebus' just decree,
To perish in the rough Trinacrian sea.
To better fate the blameless chief ordain'd,
A floating fragment of the wreck regain'd,
And rode the storm; till, by the billows toss'd,
He landed on the fair Phaeacian coast.
That race who emulate the life of gods,
Receive him joyous to their bless'd abodes;
Large gifts confer, a ready sail command,
To speed his voyage to the Grecian strand.
But your wise lord (in whose capacious soul
High schemes of power in just succession roll)
His Ithaca refused from favouring Fate,
Till copious wealth might guard his regal state.
Phedon the fact affirm'd, whose sovereign sway
Thesprotian tribes, a duteous race, obey;
And bade the gods this added truth attest
(While pure libations crown'd the genial feast),
That anchor'd in his port the vessels stand,
To waft the hero to his natal land.
I for Dulichium urge the watery way,
But first the Ulyssean wealth survey:
So rich the value of a store so vast
Demands the pomp of centuries to waste!
The darling object of your royal love
Was journey'd thence to Dodonean Jove;
By the sure precept of the sylvan shrine,
To form the conduct of his great design;
Irresolute of soul, his state to shroud
In dark disguise, or come, a king avow'd!
Thus lives your lord; nor longer doom'd to roam;
Soon will he grace this dear paternal dome.
By Jove, the source of good, supreme in power!
By the bless'd genius of this friendly bower!
I ratify my speech, before the sun
His annual longitude of heaven shall run;
When the pale empress of yon starry train
In the next month renews her faded wane,
Ulysses will assert his rightful reign."

"What thanks! what boon! (replied the queen), are due,
When time shall prove the storied blessing true!
My lord's return should fate no more retard,
Envy shall sicken at thy vast reward.
But my prophetic fears, alas! presage
The wounds of Destiny's relentless rage.
I long must weep, nor will Ulysses come,
With royal gifts to send you honour'd home!--
Your other task, ye menial train forbear:
Now wash the stranger, and the bed prepare:
With splendid palls the downy fleece adorn:
Uprising early with the purple morn.
His sinews, shrunk with age, and stiff with toil,
In the warm bath foment with fragrant oil.
Then with Telemachus the social feast
Partaking free, my soul invited guest;
Whoe'er neglects to pay distinction due,
The breach of hospitable right may rue.
The vulgar of my sex I most exceed
In real fame, when most humane my deed;
And vainly to the praise of queen aspire,
If, stranger! I permit that mean attire
Beneath the feastful bower. A narrow space
Confines the circle of our destin'd race;
'Tis ours with good the scanty round to grace.
Those who to cruel wrong their state abuse,
Dreaded in life the mutter'd curse pursues;
By death disrobed of all their savage powers,
Then, licensed rage her hateful prey devours.
But he whose inborn worth his acts commend,
Of gentle soul, to human race a friend;
The wretched he relieves diffuse his fame,
And distant tongues extol the patron-name."

"Princess? (he cried) in vain your bounties flow
On me, confirm'd and obstinate in woe.
When my loved Crete received my final view,
And from my weeping eyes her cliffs withdrew;
These tatter'd weeds (my decent robes resign'd)
I chose, the livery of a woful mind!
Nor will my heart-corroding care abate
With splendid palls, and canopies of state:
Low-couch'd on earth, the gift of sleep I scorn,
And catch the glances of the waking morn.
The delicacy of your courtly train
To wash a wretched wanderer would disdain;
But if, in tract of long experience tried,
And sad similitude of woes allied,
Some wretch reluctant views aerial light,
To her mean hand assign the friendly rite."

Pleased with his wise reply, the queen rejoin'd:
"Such gentle manners, and so sage a mind,
In all who graced this hospitable bower
I ne'er discerned, before this social hour.
Such servant as your humble choice requires,
To light received the lord of my desires,
New from the birth; and with a mother's hand
His tender bloom to manly growth sustain'd:
Of matchless prudence, and a duteous mind;
Though now to life's extremest verge declined,
Of strength superior to the toil design'd--
Rise, Euryclea! with officious care
For the poor friend the cleansing bath prepare:
This debt his correspondent fortunes claim,
Too like Ulysses, and perhaps the same!
Thus old with woes my fancy paints him now!
For age untimely marks the careful brow."

Instant, obsequious to the mild command,
Sad Euryclea rose: with trembling hand
She veils the torrent of her tearful eyes;
And thus impassion'd to herself replies:

"Son of my love, and monarch of my cares,
What pangs for thee this wretched bosom bears!
Are thus by Jove who constant beg his aid
With pious deed, and pure devotion, paid?
He never dared defraud the sacred fane
Of perfect hecatombs in order slain:
There oft implored his tutelary power,
Long to protract the sad sepulchral hour;
That, form'd for empire with paternal care,
His realm might recognize an equal heir.
O destined head! The pious vows are lost;
His God forgets him on a foreign coast!--
Perhaps, like thee, poor guest! in wanton pride
The rich insult him, and the young deride!
Conscious of worth reviled, thy generous mind
The friendly rite of purity declined;
My will concurring with my queen's command,
Accept the bath from this obsequious hand.
A strong emotion shakes my anguish'd breast:
In thy whole form Ulysses seems express'd;
Of all the wretched harboured on our coast,
None imaged e'er like thee my master lost."

Thus half-discover'd through the dark disguise,
With cool composure feign'd, the chief replies:
"You join your suffrage to the public vote;
The same you think have all beholders thought."

He said: replenish'd from the purest springs,
The laver straight with busy care she brings:
In the deep vase, that shone like burnish'd gold,
The boiling fluid temperates the cold.
Meantime revolving in his thoughtful mind
The scar, with which his manly knee was sign'd;
His face averting from the crackling blaze,
His shoulders intercept the unfriendly rays:
Thus cautious in the obscure he hoped to fly
The curious search of Euryclea's eye.
Cautious in vain! nor ceased the dame to find
This scar with which his manly knee was sign'd.

This on Parnassus (combating the boar)
With glancing rage the tusky savage tore.
Attended by his brave maternal race,
His grandsire sent him to the sylvan chase,
Autolycus the bold (a mighty name
For spotless faith and deeds of martial fame:
Hermes, his patron god, those gifts bestow'd,
Whose shrine with weanling lambs he wont to load).
His course to Ithaca this hero sped,
When the first product of Laertes' bed
Was now disclosed to birth: the banquet ends,
When Euryclea from the queen descends,
And to his fond embrace the babe commends:
"Receive (she cries) your royal daughter's son;
And name the blessing that your prayers have won."
Then thus the hoary chief: "My victor arms
Have awed the realms around with dire alarms:
A sure memorial of my dreaded fame
The boy shall bear; Ulysses be his name!
And when with filial love the youth shall come
To view his mother's soil, my Delphic dome
With gifts of price shall send him joyous home."
Lured with the promised boon, when youthful prime
Ended in man, his mother's natal clime
Ulysses sought; with fond affection dear
Amphitea's arms received the royal heir:
Her ancient lord an equal joy possess'd;
Instant he bade prepare the genial feast:
A steer to form the sumptuous banquet bled,
Whose stately growth five flowery summers fed:
His sons divide, and roast with artful care
The limbs; then all the tasteful viands share.
Nor ceased discourse (the banquet of the soul),
Till Phoebus wheeling to the western goal
Resign'd the skies, and night involved the pole.
Their drooping eyes the slumberous shade oppress'd,
Sated they rose, and all retired to rest.

Soon as the morn, new-robed in purple light,
Pierced with her golden shafts the rear of night,
Ulysses, and his brave maternal race,
The young Autolyci, essay the chase.
Parnassus, thick perplex'd with horrid shades,
With deep-mouth'd hounds the hunter-troop invades;
What time the sun, from ocean's peaceful stream,
Darts o'er the lawn his horizontal beam.
The pack impatient snuff the tainted gale;
The thorny wilds the woodmen fierce assail:
And, foremost of the train, his cornel spear
Ulysses waved, to rouse the savage war.
Deep in the rough recesses of the wood,
A lofty copse, the growth of ages, stood;
Nor winter's boreal blast, nor thunderous shower,
Nor solar ray, could pierce the shady bower.
With wither'd foliage strew'd, a heapy store!
The warm pavilion of a dreadful boar.
Roused by the hounds' and hunters' mingling cries,
The savage from his leafy shelter flies;
With fiery glare his sanguine eye-balls shine,
And bristles high impale his horrid chine.
Young Ithacus advanced, defies the foe,
Poising his lifted lance in act to throw;
The savage renders vain the wound decreed,
And springs impetuous with opponent speed!
His tusks oblique he aim'd, the knee to gore;
Aslope they glanced, the sinewy fibres tore,
And bared the bone; Ulysses undismay'd,
Soon with redoubled force the wound repaid;
To the right shoulder-joint the spear applied,
His further flank with streaming purple dyed:
On earth he rushed with agonizing pain;
With joy and vast surprise, the applauding train
View'd his enormous bulk extended on the plain.
With bandage firm Ulysses' knee they bound;
Then, chanting mystic lays, the closing wound
Of sacred melody confess'd the force;
The tides of life regain'd their azure course.
Then back they led the youth with loud acclaim;
Autolycus, enamoured with his fame,
Confirm'd the cure; and from the Delphic dome
With added gifts return'd him glorious home.
He safe at Ithaca with joy received,
Relates the chase, and early praise achieved.

Deep o'er his knee inseam'd remain'd the scar;
Which noted token of the woodland war
When Euryclea found, the ablution ceased:
Down dropp'd the leg, from her slack hand released;
The mingled fluids from the base redound;
The vase reclining floats the floor around!
Smiles dew'd with tears the pleasing strife express'd
Of grief and joy, alternate in her breast.
Her fluttering words in melting murmurs died;
At length abrupt--"My son!--my king!"--she cried.
His neck with fond embrace infolding fast,
Full on the queen her raptured eye she cast
Ardent to speak the monarch safe restored:
But, studious to conceal her royal lord,
Minerva fix'd her mind on views remote,
And from the present bliss abstracts her thought.
His hand to Euryclea's mouth applied,
"Art thou foredoom'd my pest? (the hero cried:)
Thy milky founts my infant lips have drain'd;
And have the Fates thy babbling age ordain'd
To violate the life thy youth sustain'd?
An exile have I told, with weeping eyes,
Full twenty annual suns in distant skies;
At length return'd, some god inspires thy breast
To know thy king, and here I stand confess'd.
This heaven-discover'd truth to thee consign'd,
Reserve the treasure of thy inmost mind:
Else, if the gods my vengeful arm sustain,
And prostrate to my sword the suitor-train;
With their lewd mates, thy undistinguish'd age
Shall bleed a victim to vindictive rage."

Then thus rejoin'd the dame, devoid of fear:
"What words, my son, have passed thy lips severe?
Deep in my soul the trust shall lodge secured;
With ribs of steel, and marble heart, immured.
When Heaven, auspicious to thy right avow'd,
Shall prostrate to thy sword the suitor-crowd,
The deeds I'll blazon of the menial fair;
The lewd to death devote, the virtuous spare."

"Thy aid avails me not (the chief replied);
My own experience shall their doom decide:
A witness-judge precludes a long appeal:
Suffice it then thy monarch to conceal."

He said: obsequious, with redoubled pace,
She to the fount conveys the exhausted vase:
The bath renew'd, she ends the pleasing toil
With plenteous unction of ambrosial oil.
Adjusting to his limbs the tatter'd vest,
His former seat received the stranger guest;
Whom thus with pensive air the queen addressed:

"Though night, dissolving grief in grateful ease,
Your drooping eyes with soft impression seize;
Awhile, reluctant to her pleasing force,
Suspend the restful hour with sweet discourse.
The day (ne'er brighten'd with a beam of joy!)
My menials, and domestic cares employ;
And, unattended by sincere repose,
The night assists my ever-wakeful woes;
When nature's hush'd beneath her brooding shade,
My echoing griefs the starry vault invade.
As when the months are clad in flowery green,
Sad Philomel, in bowery shades unseen,
To vernal airs attunes her varied strains;
And Itylus sounds warbling o'er the plains;
Young Itylus, his parents' darling joy!
Whom chance misled the mother to destroy;
Now doom'd a wakeful bird to wail the beauteous boy.
So in nocturnal solitude forlorn,
A sad variety of woes I mourn!
My mind, reflective, in a thorny maze
Devious from care to care incessant strays.
Now, wavering doubt succeeds to long despair;
Shall I my virgin nuptial vow revere;
And, joining to my son's my menial train,
Partake his counsels, and assist his reign?
Or, since, mature in manhood, he deplores
His dome dishonour'd, and exhausted stores;
Shall I, reluctant! to his will accord;
And from the peers select the noblest lord;
So by my choice avow'd, at length decide
These wasteful love-debates, a mourning bride!
A visionary thought I'll now relate;
Illustrate, if you know, the shadow'd fate:

"A team of twenty geese (a snow-white train!)
Fed near the limpid lake with golden grain,
Amuse my pensive hours. The bird of Jove
Fierce from his mountain-eyrie downward drove;
Each favourite fowl he pounced with deathful sway,
And back triumphant wing'd his airy way.
My pitying eyes effused a plenteous stream,
To view their death thus imaged in a dream;
With tender sympathy to soothe my soul,
A troop of matrons, fancy-form'd, condole.
But whilst with grief and rage my bosom burn'd,
Sudden the tyrant of the skies returned;
Perch'd on the battlements he thus began
(In form an eagle, but in voice a man):
`O queen! no vulgar vision of the sky
I come, prophetic of approaching joy;
View in this plumy form thy victor-lord;
The geese (a glutton race) by thee deplored,
Portend the suitors fated to my sword.'
This said, the pleasing feather'd omen ceased.
When from the downy bands of sleep released,
Fast by the limpid lake my swan-like train
I found, insatiate of the golden grain."

"The vision self-explain'd (the chief replies)
Sincere reveals the sanction of the skies;
Ulysses speaks his own return decreed;
And by his sword the suitors sure to bleed."

"Hard is the task, and rare," (the queen rejoin'd,)
Impending destinies in dreams to find;
Immured within the silent bower of sleep,
Two portals firm the various phantoms keep;
Of ivory one; whence flit, to mock the brain,
Of winged lies a light fantastic train;
The gate opposed pellucid valves adorn,
And columns fair incased with polish'd horn;
Where images of truth for passage wait,
With visions manifest of future fate.
Not to this troop, I fear, that phantom soar'd,
Which spoke Ulysses to this realm restored;
Delusive semblance!-but my remnant life
Heaven shall determine in a gameful strife;
With that famed bow Ulysses taught to bend,
For me the rival archers shall contend.
As on the listed field he used to place
Six beams, opposed to six in equal space;
Elanced afar by his unerring art,
Sure through six circlets flew the whizzing dart.
So, when the sun restores the purple day,
Their strength and skill the suitors shall assay;
To him the spousal honour is decreed,
Who through the rings directs the feather'd reed.
Torn from these walls (where long the kinder powers
With joy and pomp have wing'd my youthful hours!)
On this poor breast no dawn of bliss shall beam;
The pleasure past supplies a copious theme
For many a dreary thought, and many a doleful dream!"

"Propose the sportive lot (the chief replies),
Nor dread to name yourself the bowyer's prize;
Ulysses will surprise the unfinish'd game,
Avow'd, and falsify the suitors' claim."

To whom with grace serene the queen rejoin'd:
"In all thy speech what pleasing force I find!
O'er my suspended woe thy words prevail;
I part reluctant from the pleasing tale,
But Heaven, that knows what all terrestrials need,
Repose to night, and toil to day decreed;
Grateful vicissitudes! yet me withdrawn,
Wakeful to weep and watch the tardy dawn
Establish'd use enjoins; to rest and joy
Estranged, since dear Ulysses sail'd to Troy!
Meantime instructed is the menial tribe
Your couch to fashion as yourself prescribe."

Thus affable, her bower the queen ascends;
The sovereign step a beauteous train attends;
There imaged to her soul Ulysses rose;
Down her pale cheek new-streaming sorrow flows;
Till soft oblivious shade Minerva spread,
And o'er her eyes ambrosial slumber shed.

An ample hide devine Ulysses spread.
And form'd of fleecy skins his humble bed
(The remnants of the spoil the suitor-crowd
In festival devour'd, and victims vow'd).
Then o'er the chief, Eurynome the chaste
With duteous care a downy carpet cast:
With dire revenge his thoughtful bosom glows,
And, ruminating wrath, he scorns repose.

As thus pavilion'd in the porch he lay,
Scenes of lewd loves his wakeful eyes survey,
Whilst to nocturnal joys impure repair,
With wanton glee, the prostituted fair.
His heart with rage this new dishonour stung,
Wavering his thoughts in dubious balance hung:
Or instant should he quench the guilty flame
With their own blood, and intercept the shame:
Or to their lust indulge a last embrace,
And let the peers consummate the disgrace
Round his swoln heart the murmurous fury rolls,
As o'er her young the mother-mastiff growls,
And bays the stranger groom: so wrath compress'd,
Recoiling, mutter'd thunder in his breast.
"Poor suffering heart! (he cried,) support the pain
Of wounded honour, and thy rage restrain.
Not fiercer woes thy fortitude could foil,
When the brave partners of thy ten years' toil
Dire Polypheme devour'd; I then was freed
By patient prudence from the death decreed."

Thus anchor'd safe on reason's peaceful coast,
Tempests of wrath his soul no longer toss'd;
Restless his body rolls, to rage resign'd
As one who long with pale-eyed famine pined,
The savoury cates on glowing embers cast
Incessant turns, impatient for repast
Ulysses so, from side to side-devolved,
In self-debate the suitor's doom resolved
When in the form of mortal nymph array'd,
From heaven descends the Jove-born martial maid;
And'hovering o'er his head in view confess'd,
The goddess thus her favourite care address'd:

"O thou, of mortals most inured to woes!
Why roll those eyes unfriended of repose?
Beneath thy palace-roof forget thy care;
Bless'd in thy queen! bless'd in thy blooming heir!
Whom, to the gods when suppliant fathers bow
They name the standard of their dearest vow."

"Just is thy kind reproach (the chief rejoin'd),
Deeds full of fate distract my various mind,
In contemplation wrapp'd. This hostile crew
What single arm hath prowess to subdue?
Or if, by Jove's and thy auxiliar aid,
They're doom'd to bleed; O say, celestial maid!
Where shall Ulysses shun, or how sustain
Nations embattled to revenge the slain?"

"Oh impotence of faith! (Minerva cries,)
If man on frail unknowing man relies,
Doubt you the gods? Lo, Pallas' self descends,
Inspires thy counsels, and thy toils attends.
In me affianced, fortify thy breast,
Though myriads leagued thy rightful claim contest
My sure divinity shall bear the shield,
And edge thy sword to reap the glorious field.
Now, pay the debt to craving nature due,
Her faded powers with balmy rest renew."
She ceased, ambrosial slumbers seal his eyes;
Her care dissolves in visionary joys
The goddess, pleased, regains her natal skies.

Not so the queen; the downy bands of sleep
By grief relax'd she waked again to weep:
A gloomy pause ensued of dumb despair;
Then thus her fate invoked, with fervent prayer

"Diana! speed thy deathful ebon dart,
And cure the pangs of this convulsive heart.
Snatch me, ye whirlwinds! far from human race,
Toss'd through the void illimitable space
Or if dismounted from the rapid cloud,
Me with his whelming wave let Ocean shroud!
So, Pandarus, thy hopes, three orphan fair;
Were doom'd to wander through the devious air;
Thyself untimely, and thy consort died,
But four celestials both your cares supplied.
Venus in tender delicacy rears
With honey, milk, and wine their infant years;
Imperial Juno to their youth assigned
A form majestic, and sagacious mind;
With shapely growth Diana graced their bloom;
And Pallas taught the texture of the loom.
But whilst, to learn their lots in nuptial love,
Bright Cytherea sought the bower of Jove
(The God supreme, to whose eternal eye
The registers of fate expanded lie;
Wing'd Harpies snatch the unguarded charge away,
And to the Furies bore a grateful prey.
Be such my lot! Or thou, Diana, speed
Thy shaft, and send me joyful to the dead;
To seek my lord among the warrior train,
Ere second vows my bridal faith profane.
When woes the waking sense alone assail,
Whilst Night extends her soft oblivious veil,
Of other wretches' care the torture ends;
No truce the warfare of my heart suspends!
The night renews the day distracting theme,
And airy terrors sable every dream.
The last alone a kind illusion wrought,
And to my bed my loved Ulysses brought,
In manly bloom, and each majestic grace,
As when for Troy he left my fond embrace;
Such raptures in my beating bosom rise,
I deem it sure a vision of the skies."

Thus, whilst Aurora mounts her purple throne,
In audible laments she breathes her moan;
The sounds assault Ulysses' wakeful ear;
Misjudging of the cause, a sudden fear
Of his arrival known, the chief alarms;
He thinks the queen is rushing to his arms.
Upspringing from his couch, with active haste
The fleece and carpet in the dome he placed
(The hide, without, imbibed the morning air);
And thus the gods invoked with ardent prayer:

"Jove, and eternal thrones! with heaven to friend,
If the long series of my woes shall end;
Of human race now rising from repose,
Let one a blissful omen here disclose;
And, to confirm my faith, propitious Jove!
Vouchsafe the sanction of a sign above."

Whilst lowly thus the chief adoring bows,
The pitying god his guardian aid avows.
Loud from a sapphire sky his thunder sounds;
With springing hope the hero's heart rebounds.
Soon, with consummate joy to crown his prayer,
An omen'd voice invades his ravish'd ear.
Beneath a pile that close the dome adjoin'd,
Twelve female slaves the gift of Ceres grind;
Task'd for the royal board to bolt the bran
From the pure flour (the growth and strength of man)
Discharging to the day the labour due,
Now early to repose the rest withdrew;
One maid unequal to the task assign'd,
Still turn'd the toilsome mill with anxious mind;
And thus in bitterness of soul divined:

"Father of gods and men, whose thunders roll
O'er the cerulean vault, and shake the pole:
Whoe'er from Heaven has gain'd this rare ostent
(Of granted vows a certain signal sent),
In this blest moment of accepted prayer,
Piteous, regard a wretch consumed with care!
Instant, O Jove! confound the suitor-train,
For whom o'ertoil'd I grind the golden grain:
Far from this dome the lewd devourers cast,
And be this festival decreed their last!"

Big with their doom denounced in earth and sky,
Ulysses' heart dilates with secret joy.
Meantime the menial train with unctious wood
Heap'd high the genial hearth, Vulcanian food:
When, early dress'd, advanced the royal heir;
With manly grasp he waved a martial spear;
A radiant sabre graced his purple zone,
And on his foot the golden sandal shone.
His steps impetuous to the portal press'd;
And Euryclea thus he there address'd:

"Say thou to whom my youth its nurture owes,
Was care for due refection and repose
Bestow'd the stranger-guest? Or waits he grieved,
His age not honour'd, nor his wants relieved?
Promiscuous grace on all the queen confers
(In woes bewilder'd, oft the wisest errs).
The wordy vagrant to the dole aspires,
And modest worth with noble scorn retires."

She thus: "O cease that ever-honour'd name
To blemish now: it ill deserves your blame,
A bowl of generous wine sufficed the guest;
In vain the queen the night refection press'd;
Nor would he court repose in downy state,
Unbless'd, abandon'd to the rage of Fate!
A hide beneath the portico was spread,
And fleecy skins composed an humble bed;
A downy carpet cast with duteous care,
Secured him from the keen nocturnal air."

His cornel javelin poised with regal port,
To the sage Greeks convened in Themis' court,
Forth-issuing from the dome the prince repair'd;
Two dogs of chase, a lion-hearted guard,
Behind him sourly stalked. Without delay
The dame divides the labour of the day;
Thus urging to the toil the menial train;

"What marks of luxury the marble stain
Its wonted lustre let the floor regain;
The seats with purple clothe in order due;
And let the abstersive sponge the board renew;
Let some refresh the vase's sullied mould;
Some bid the goblets boast their native gold;
Some to the spring, with each a jar, repair,
And copious waters pure for bathing bear;
Dispatch! for soon the suitors will essay
The lunar feast-rites to the god of day."

She said: with duteous haste a bevy fair
Of twenty virgins to the spring repair;
With varied toils the rest adorn the dome.
Magnificent, and blithe, the suitors come.
Some wield the sounding axe; the dodder'd oaks
Divide, obedient to the forceful strokes.
Soon from the fount, with each a brimming urn
(Eumaeus in their train), the maids return.
Three porkers for the feast, all brawny-chined,
He brought; the choicest of the tusky-kind;
In lodgments first secure his care he viewed,
Then to the king this friendly speech renew'd:
"Now say sincere, my guest! the suitor-train
Still treat thy worth with lordly dull disdain;
Or speaks their deed a bounteous mind humane?"

"Some pitying god (Ulysses sad replied)
With vollied vengeance blast their towering pride!
No conscious blush, no sense of right, restrains
The tides of lust that swell the boiling veins;
From vice to vice their appetites are toss'd,
All cheaply sated at another's cost!"

While thus the chief his woes indignant told,
Melanthius, master of the bearded fold,
The goodliest goats of all the royal herd
Spontaneous to the suitors' feast preferr'd;
Two grooms assistant bore the victims bound;
With quavering cries the vaulted roofs resound;
And to the chief austere aloud began
The wretch unfriendly to the race of man:

"Here vagrant, still? offensive to my lords!
Blows have more energy than airy words;
These arguments I'll use: nor conscious shame,
Nor threats, thy bold intrusion will reclaim.
On this high feast the meanest vulgar boast
A plenteous board! Hence! seek another host!"

Rejoinder to the churl the king disdain'd,
But shook his head, and rising wrath restrain'd.

From Cephanelia 'cross the surgy main
Philaetius late arrived, a faithful swain.
A steer ungrateful to the bull's embrace.
And goats he brought, the pride of all their race;
Imported in a shallop not his own;
The dome re-echoed to the mingl'd moan.
Straight to the guardian of the bristly kind
He thus began, benevolent of mind:

"What guest is he, of such majestic air?
His lineage and paternal clime declare:
Dim through the eclipse of fate, the rays divine
Of sovereign state with faded splendour shine.
If monarchs by the gods are plunged in woe,
To what abyss are we foredoom'd to go!"
Then affable he thus the chief address'd,
Whilst with pathetic warmth his hand he press'd:

"Stranger, may fate a milder aspect show,
And spin thy future with a whiter clue!
O Jove! for ever death to human cries;
The tyrant, not the father of the skies!
Unpiteous of the race thy will began!
The fool of fate, thy manufacture, man,
With penury, contempt, repulse, and care,
The galling load of life is doom'd to bear.
Ulysses from his state a wanderer still,
Upbraids thy power, thy wisdom, or thy will!
O monarch ever dear!-O man of woe!
Fresh flow my tears, and shall for ever flow!
Like thee, poor stranger guest, denied his home,
Like thee: in rags obscene decreed to roam!
Or, haply perish'd on some distant coast,
In stygian gloom he glides, a pensive ghost!
Oh, grateful for the good his bounty gave,
I'll grieve, till sorrow sink me to the grave!
His kind protecting hand my youth preferr'd,
The regent of his Cephalenian herd;
With vast increase beneath my care it spreads:
A stately breed! and blackens far the meads.
Constrain'd, the choicest beeves I thence import,
To cram these cormorants that crowd his court:
Who in partition seek his realm to share;
Nor human right nor wrath divine revere,
Since here resolved oppressive these reside,
Contending doubts my anxious heart divide:
Now to some foreign clime inclined to fly,
And with the royal herd protection buy;
Then, happier thoughts return the nodding scale,
Light mounts despair, alternate hopes prevail:
In opening prospects of ideal joy,
My king returns; the proud usurpers die."

To whom the chief: "In thy capacious mind
Since daring zeal with cool debate is join'd,
Attend a deed already ripe in fate:
Attest, O Jove! the truth I now relate!
This sacred truth attest, each genial power,
Who bless the board, and guard this friendly bower!
Before thou quit the dome (nor long delay)
Thy wish produced in act, with pleased survey,
Thy wondering eyes shall view: his rightful reign
By arms avow'd Ulysses shall regain,
And to the shades devote the suitor-train."

"O Jove supreme! (the raptured swain replies,)
With deeds consummate soon the promised joys!
These aged nerves, with new-born vigour strung,
In that blest cause should emulate the young."
Assents Eumaeus to the prayer address'd;
And equal ardours fire his loyal breast.

Meantime the suitors urge the prince's fate,
And deathful arts employ the dire debate:
When in his airy tour, the bird of Jove
Truss'd with his sinewy pounce a trembling dove;
Sinister to their hope! This omen eyed
Amphinomus, who thus presaging cried:

"The gods from force and fraud the prince defend;
O peers! the sanguinary scheme suspend:
Your future thought let sable fate employ;
And give the present hour to genial joy."

From council straight the assenting peerage ceased,
And in the dome prepared the genial feast.
Disrobed, their vests apart in order lay,
Then all with speed succinct the victims slay:
With sheep and shaggy goats the porkers bled,
And the proud steer was on the marble spread.
With fire prepared, they deal the morsels round,
Wine, rosy-bright, the brimming goblets crown'd,
By sage Eumaeus borne; the purple tide
Melanthius from an ample jar supplied:
High canisters of bread Philaetius placed;
And eager all devour the rich repast.
Disposed apart, Ulysses shares the treat;
A trivet table, and ignobler seat,
The prince appoints; but to his sire assigns
The tasteful inwards, and nectareous wines.
"Partake, my guest (he cried), without control
The social feast, and drain the cheering bowl:
Dread not the railer's laugh, nor ruffian's rage;
No vulgar roof protects thy honour'd age;
This dome a refuge to thy wrongs shall be,
From my great sire too soon devolved to me!
Your violence and scorn, ye suitors, cease,
Lest arms avenge the violated peace."

Awed by the prince, so haughty, brave, and young,
Rage gnaw'd the lip, amazement chain'd the tongue.
"Be patient, peers! (at length Antinous cries,)
The threats of vain imperious youth despise:
Would Jove permit the meditated blow,
That stream of eloquence should cease to flow."

Without reply vouchsafed, Antinous ceased:
Meanwhile the pomp of festival increased:
By heralds rank'd; in marshall'd order move
The city tribes, to pleased Apollo's grove:
Beneath the verdure of which awful shade,
The lunar hecatomb they grateful laid;
Partook the sacred feast, and ritual honours paid.
But the rich banquet, in the dome prepared
(An humble sideboard set) Ulysses shared.
Observant of the prince's high behest,
His menial train attend the stranger-guest;
Whom Pallas with unpardoning fury fired,
By lordly pride and keen reproach inspired.
A Samian peer, more studious than the rest
Of vice, who teem'd with many a dead-born jest;
And urged, for title to a consort queen,
Unnumber'd acres arable and green
(Otesippus named); this lord Ulysses eyed,
And thus burst out the imposthumate with pride:

"The sentence I propose, ye peers, attend:
Since due regard must wait the prince's friend,
Let each a token of esteem bestow:
This gift acquits the dear respect I owe;
With which he nobly may discharge his seat,
And pay the menials for a master's treat."

He said: and of the steer before him placed,
That sinewy fragment at Ulysses cast,
Where to the pastern-bone, by nerves combined,
The well-horn'd foot indissolubly join'd;
Which whizzing high, the wall unseemly sign'd.
The chief indignant grins a ghastly smile;
Revenge and scorn within his bosom boil:
When thus the prince with pious rage inflamed:
"Had not the inglorious wound thy malice aim'd
Fall'n guiltless of the mark, my certain spear
Had made thee buy the brutal triumph dear:
Nor should thy sire a queen his daughter boast;
The suitor, now, had vanish'd in a ghost:
No more, ye lewd compeers, with lawless power
Invade my dome, my herds and flocks devour:
For genuine worth, of age mature to know,
My grape shall redden, and my harvest grow
Or, if each other's wrongs ye still support,
With rapes and riot to profane my court;
What single arm with numbers can contend?
On me let all your lifted swords descend,
And with my life such vile dishonours end."

A long cessation of discourse ensued,
By gentler Agelaus thus renew'd:

"A just reproof, ye peers! your rage restrain
From the protected guest, and menial train:
And, prince! to stop the source of future ill,
Assent yourself, and gain the royal will.
Whilst hope prevail'd to see your sire restored,
Of right the queen refused a second lord:
But who so vain of faith, so blind to fate,
To think he still survives to claim the state?
Now press the sovereign dame with warm desire
To wed, as wealth or worth her choice inspire:
The lord selected to the nuptial joys
Far hence will lead the long-contested prize:
Whilst in paternal pomp with plenty bless'd,
You reign, of this imperial dome possess'd."

Sage and serene Telemachus replies:
"By him at whose behest the thunder flies,
And by the name on earth I most revere,
By great Ulysses and his woes I swear!
(Who never must review his dear domain;
Enroll'd, perhaps, in Pluto's dreary train),
Whene'er her choice the royal dame avows,
My bridal gifts shall load the future spouse:
But from this dome my parent queen to chase!
From me, ye gods! avert such dire disgrace."

But Pallas clouds with intellectual gloom
The suitors' souls, insensate of their doom!
A mirthful frenzy seized the fated crowd;
The roofs resound with causeless laughter loud;
Floating in gore, portentous to survey!
In each discolour'd vase the viands lay;
Then down each cheek the tears spontaneous flow
And sudden sighs precede approaching woe.
In vision wrapp'd, the Hyperesian seer
Uprose, and thus divined the vengeance near:

"O race to death devote! with Stygian shade
Each destin'd peer impending fates invade;
With tears your wan distorted cheeks are drown'd;
With sanguine drops the walls are rubied round:
Thick swarms the spacious hall with howling ghosts,
To people Orcus, and the burning coasts!
Nor gives the sun his golden orb to roll,
But universal night usurps the pole!"

Yet warn'd in vain, with laughter loud elate
The peers reproach the sure divine of Fate;
And thus Eurymachus: "The dotard's mind
To every sense is lost, to reason blind;
Swift from the dome conduct the slave away;
Let him in open air behold the day."

"Tax not (the heaven-illumined seer rejoin'd)
Of rage, or folly, my prophetic mind,
No clouds of error dim the ethereal rays,
Her equal power each faithful sense obeys.
Unguided hence my trembling steps I bend,
Far hence, before yon hovering deaths descend;
Lest the ripe harvest of revenge begun,
I share the doom ye suitors cannot shun."

This said, to sage Piraeus sped the seer,
His honour'd host, a welcome inmate there.
O'er the protracted feast the suitors sit,
And aim to wound the prince with pointless wit:
Cries one, with scornful leer and mimic voice,
"Thy charity we praise, but not thy choice;
Why such profusion of indulgence shown
To this poor, timorous, toil-detesting drone?
That others feeds on planetary schemes,
And pays his host with hideous noon-day dreams.
But, prince! for once at least believe a friend;
To some Sicilian mart these courtiers send,
Where, if they yield their freight across the main,
Dear sell the slaves! demand no greater gain."

Thus jovial they; but nought the prince replies;
Full on his sire he roll'd his ardent eyes:
Impatient straight to flesh his virgin-sword;
From the wise chief he waits the deathful word.
Nigh in her bright alcove, the pensive queen
To see the circle sate, of all unseen.
Sated at length they rise, and bid prepare
An eve-repast, with equal cost and care:
But vengeful Pallas, with preventing speed,
A feast proportion'd to their crimes decreed;
A feast of death, the feasters doom'd to bleed!

And Pallas now, to raise the rivals' fires,
With her own art Penelope inspires
Who now can bend Ulysses' bow, and wing
The well-aim'd arrow through the distant ring,
Shall end the strife, and win the imperial dame:
But discord and black death await the game!

The prudent queen the lofty stair ascends:
At distance due a virgin-train attends;
A brazen key she held, the handle turn'd,
With steel and polish'd elephant adorn'd:
Swift to the inmost room she bent her way,
Where, safe reposed, the royal treasures lay:
There shone high heap'd the labour'd brass and ore,
And there the bow which great Ulysses bore;
And there the quiver, where now guiltless slept
Those winged deaths that many a matron wept.

This gift, long since when Sparta's shore he trod,
On young Ulysses Iphitus bestowed:
Beneath Orsilochus' roof they met;
One loss was private, one a public debt;
Messena's state from Ithaca detains
Three hundred sheep, and all the shepherd swains;
And to the youthful prince to urge the laws,
The king and elders trust their common cause.
But Iphitus, employed on other cares,
Search'd the wide country for his wandering mares,
And mules, the strongest of the labouring kind;
Hapless to search; more hapless still to find!
For journeying on to Hercules, at length
That lawless wretch, that man of brutal strength,
Deaf to Heaven's voice, the social rites transgress'd;
And for the beauteous mares destroy'd his guest.
He gave the bow; and on Ulysses' part
Received a pointed sword, and missile dart:
Of luckless friendship on a foreign shore
Their first, last pledges! for they met no more.
The bow, bequeath'd by this unhappy hand,
Ulysses bore not from his native land;
Nor in the front of battle taught to bend,
But kept in dear memorial of his friend.

Now gently winding up the fair ascent,
By many an easy step the matron went;
Then o'er the pavement glides with grace divine
(With polish'd oak the level pavements shine);
The folding gates a dazzling light display'd,
With pomp of various architrave o'erlaid.
The bolt, obedient to the silken string,
Forsakes the staple as she pulls the ring;
The wards respondent to the key turn round;
The bars fall back; the flying valves resound;
Loud as a bull makes hill and valley ring,
So roar'd the lock when it released the spring.
She moves majestic through the wealthy room,
Where treasured garments cast a rich perfume;
There from the column where aloft it hung,
Reach'd in its splendid case, the bow unstrung;
Across her knees she laid the well-known bow,
And pensive sate, and tears began to flow.
To full satiety of grief she mourns,
Then silent to the joyous hall returns,
To the proud suitors bears in pensive state
The unbended bow, and arrows winged with fate.

Behind, her train the polish'd coffer brings,
Which held the alternate brass and silver rings.
Full in the portal the chaste queen appears,
And with her veil conceals the coming tears:
On either side awaits a virgin fair;
While thus the matron, with majestic air:

"Say you, when these forbidden walls inclose,
For whom my victims bleed, my vintage flows:
If these neglected, faded charms can move?
Or is it but a vain pretence, you love?
If I the prize, if me you seek to wife,
Hear the conditions, and commence the strife.
Who first Ulysses' wondrous bow shall bend,
And through twelve ringlets the fleet arrow send;
Him will I follow, and forsake my home,
For him forsake this loved, this wealthy dome,
Long, long the scene of all my past delight,
And still to last, the vision of my night!"

Graceful she said, and bade Eumaeus show
The rival peers the ringlets and the bow.
From his full eyes the tears unbidden spring,
Touch'd at the dear memorials of his king.
Philaetius too relents, but secret shed
The tender drops. Antinous saw, and said:

"Hence to your fields, ye rustics! hence away,
Nor stain with grief the pleasures of the day;
Nor to the royal heart recall in vain
The sad remembrance of a perish'd man.
Enough her precious tears already flow--
Or share the feast with due respect; or go
To weep abroad, and leave to us the bow,
No vulgar task! Ill suits this courtly crew
That stubborn horn which brave Ulysses drew.
I well remember (for I gazed him o'er
While yet a child), what majesty he bore!
And still (all infant as I was) retain
The port, the strength, the grandeur of the man."

He said, but in his soul fond joys arise,
And his proud hopes already win the prize.
To speed the flying shaft through every ring,
Wretch! is not thine: the arrows of the king
Shall end those hopes, and fate is on the wing!

Then thus Telemachus: "Some god I find
With pleasing frenzy has possess'd my mind;
When a loved mother threatens to depart,
Why with this ill-timed gladness leaps my heart?
Come then, ye suitors! and dispute a prize
Richer than all the Achaian state supplies,
Than all proud Argos, or Mycaena knows,
Than all our isles or continents inclose;
A woman matchless, and almost divine,
Fit for the praise of every tongue but mine.
No more excuses then, no more delay;
Haste to the trial--Lo! I lead the way.

"I too may try, and if this arm can wing
The feather'd arrow through the destined ring,
Then if no happier night the conquest boast,
I shall not sorrow for a mother lost;
But, bless'd in her, possess those arms alone,
Heir of my father's strength, as well as throne."

He spoke; then rising, his broad sword unbound,
And cast his purple garment on the ground.
A trench he open'd: in a line he placed.
The level axes, and the points made fast
(His perfect skill the wondering gazers eyed,
The game as yet unseen, as yet untried).
Then, with a manly pace, he took his stand:
And grasp'd the bow, and twang'd it in his hand.
Three times, with beating heart, he made essay:
Three times, unequal to the task, gave way;
A modest boldness on his cheek appear'd:
And thrice he hoped, and thrice again he fear'd.
The fourth had drawn it. The great sire with joy
Beheld, but with a sign forbade the boy.
His ardour straight the obedient prince suppress'd,
And, artful, thus the suitor-train address'd:

"O lay the cause on youth yet immature!
(For heaven forbid such weakness should endure!)
How shall this arm, unequal to the bow,
Retort an insult, or repel a foe?
But you! whom Heaven with better nerves has bless'd,
Accept the trial, and the prize contest."

He cast the bow before him, and apart
Against the polish'd quiver propp'd the dart.
Resuming then his seat, Eupithes' son,
The bold Antinous, to the rest begun:
"From where the goblet first begins to flow,
From right to left in order take the bow;
And prove your several strengths." The princes heard
And first Leiodes, blameless priest'd, appear'd:
The eldest born of Oenops' noble race,
Who next the goblet held his holy place:
He, only he, of all the suitor throng,
Their deeds detested, and abjured the wrong.
With tender hands the stubborn horn he strains,
The stubborn horn resisted all his pains!
Already in despair he gives it o'er:
"Take it who will (he cries), I strive no more,
What numerous deaths attend this fatal bow!
What souls and spirits shall it send below!
Better, indeed, to die, and fairly give
Nature her debt, than disappointed live,
With each new sun to some new hope a prey,
Yet still to-morrow falser than to-day.
How long in vain Penelope we sought!
This bow shall ease us of that idle thought,
And send us with some humbler wife to live,
Whom gold shall gain, or destiny shall give."

Thus speaking, on the floor the bow he placed
(With rich inlay the various floor was graced):
At distance far the feather'd shaft he throws,
And to the seat returns from whence he rose.

To him Antinous thus with fury said:
"What words ill-omen'd from thy lips have fled?
Thy coward-function ever is in fear!
Those arms are dreadful which thou canst not bear,
Why should this bow be fatal to the brave?
Because the priest is born a peaceful slave.
Mark then what others can." He ended there,
And bade Melanthius a vast pile prepare;
He gives it instant flame, then fast beside
Spreads o'er an ample board a bullock's hide.
With melted lard they soak the weapon o'er,
Chafe every knot, and supple every pore.
Vain all their art, and all their strength as vain;
The bow inflexible resists their pain.
The force of great Eurymachus alone
And bold Antinous, yet untired, unknown:
Those only now remain'd; but those confess'd
Of all the train the mightiest and the best.

Then from the hall, and from the noisy crew,
The masters of the herd and flock withdrew.
The king observes them, he the hall forsakes,
And, past the limits of the court, o'ertakes.
Then thus with accent mild Ulysses spoke:
"Ye faithful guardians of the herd and flock!
Shall I the secret of my breast conceal,
Or (as my soul now dictates) shall I tell?
Say, should some favouring god restore again
The lost Ulysses to his native reign,
How beat your hearts? what aid would you afford
To the proud suitors, or your ancient lord?"

Philaetius thus: "O were thy word not vain!
Would mighty Jove restore that man again!
These aged sinews, with new vigour strung,
In his blest cause should emulate the young."
With equal vows Eumaeus too implored
Each power above, with wishes for his lord.

He saw their secret souls, and thus began:
"Those vows the gods accord; behold the man!
Your own Ulysses! twice ten years detain'd
By woes and wanderings from this hapless land:
At length he comes; but comes despised, unknown,
And finding faithful you, and you alone.
All else have cast him from their very thought,
E'en in their wishes and their prayers forgot!
Hear then, my friends: If Jove this arm succeed,
And give yon impious revellers to bleed,
My care shall be to bless your future lives
With large possessions and with faithful wives;
Fast by my palace shall your domes ascend,
And each on young Telemachus attend,
And each be call'd his brother and my friend.
To give you firmer faith, now trust your eye;
Lo! the broad scar indented on my thigh,
When with Autolycus' sons, of yore,
On Parnass' top I chased the tusky boar."
His ragged vest then drawn aside disclosed
The sign conspicuous, and the scar exposed:
Eager they view'd, with joy they stood amazed
With tearful eyes o'er all their master gazed:
Around his neck their longing arms they cast,
His head, his shoulders, and his knees embraced;
Tears followed tears; no word was in their power;
In solemn silence fell the kindly shower.
The king too weeps, the king too grasps their hands;
And moveless, as a marble fountain, stands.

Thus had their joy wept down the setting sun,
But first the wise man ceased, and thus begun:
"Enough--on other cares your thought employ,
For danger waits on all untimely joy.
Full many foes and fierce, observe us near;
Some may betray, and yonder walls may hear.
Re-enter then, not all at once, but stay
Some moments you, and let me lead the way.
To me, neglected as I am I know
The haughty suitors will deny the bow;
But thou, Eumaeus, as 'tis borne away,
Thy master's weapon to his hand convey.
At every portal let some matron wait,
And each lock fast the well-compacted gate:
Close let them keep, whate'er invades their ear;
Though arms, or shouts, or dying groans they hear.
To thy strict charge, Philaetius, we consign
The court's main gate: to guard that pass be thine."

This said, he first return'd; the faithful swains
At distance follow, as their king ordains.
Before the flame Eurymachus now stands,
And turns the bow, and chafes it with his hands
Still the tough bow unmoved. The lofty man
Sigh'd from his mighty soul, and thus began:

"I mourn the common cause: for, oh, my friends,
On me, on all, what grief, what shame attends!
Not the lost nuptials can affect me more
(For Greece has beauteous dames on every shore),
But baffled thus! confess'd so far below
Ulysses' strength, as not to bend his bow!
How shall all ages our attempt deride!
Our weakness scorn!" Antinous thus replied:

"Not so, Eurymachus: that no man draws
The wondrous bow, attend another cause.
Sacred to Phoebus is the solemn day,
Which thoughtless we in games would waste away:
Till the next dawn this ill-timed strife forego,
And here leave fixed the ringlets in a row.
Now bid the sewer approach, and let us join
In due libations, and in rites divine,
So end our night: before the day shall spring,
The choicest offerings let Melanthius bring:
Let then to Phoebus' name the fatted thighs
Feed the rich smokes high curling to the skies.
So shall the patron of these arts bestow
(For his the gift) the skill to bend the bow."

They heard well pleased: the ready heralds bring
The cleansing waters from the limpid spring:
The goblet high with rosy wine they crown'd,
In order circling to the peers around.
That rite complete, uprose the thoughtful man,
And thus his meditated scheme began:

"If what I ask your noble minds approve,
Ye peers and rivals in the royal love!
Chief, if it hurt not great Antinous' ear
(Whose sage decision I with wonder hear),
And if Eurymachus the motion please:
Give Heaven this day and rest the bow in peace.
To-morrow let your arms dispute the prize,
And take it he, the favour'd of the skies!
But, since till then this trial you delay,
Trust it one moment to my hands to-day:
Fain would I prove, before your judging eyes,
What once I was, whom wretched you despise:
If yet this arm its ancient force retain;
Or if my woes (a long-continued train)
And wants and insults, make me less than man."

Rage flash'd in lightning from the suitors' eyes,
Yet mixed with terror at the bold emprise.
Antinous then: "O miserable guest!
Is common sense quite banish'd from thy breast?
Sufficed it not, within the palace placed,
To sit distinguish'd, with our presence graced,
Admitted here with princes to confer,
A man unknown, a needy wanderer?
To copious wine this insolence we owe,
And much thy betters wine can overthrow:
The great Eurytian when this frenzy stung,
Pirithous' roofs with frantic riot rung;
Boundless the Centaur raged; till one and all
The heroes rose, and dragg'd him from the hall;
His nose they shorten'd, and his ears they slit,
And sent him sober'd home, with better wit.
Hence with long war the double race was cursed,
Fatal to all, but to the aggressor first.
Such fate I prophesy our guest attends,
If here this interdicted bow he bends:
Nor shall these walls such insolence contain:
The first fair wind transports him o'er the main,
Where Echetus to death the guilty brings
(The worst of mortals, e'en the worst of kings).
Better than that, if thou approve our cheer;
Cease the mad strife and share our bounty here."

To this the queen her just dislike express'd:

"'Tis impious, prince, to harm the stranger-guest,
Base to insult who bears a suppliant's name,
And some respect Telemachus may claim.
What if the immortals on the man bestow
Sufficient strength to draw the mighty bow?
Shall I, a queen, by rival chiefs adored,
Accept a wandering stranger for my lord?
A hope so idle never touch'd his brain:
Then ease your bosoms of a fear so vain.
Far be he banish'd from this stately scene
Who wrongs his princess with a thought so mean."

"O fair! and wisest of so fair a kind!
(Respectful thus Eurymachus rejoin'd,)
Moved by no weak surmise, but sense of shame,
We dread the all-arraigning voice of Fame:
We dread the censure of the meanest slave,
The weakest woman: all can wrong the brave.
'Behold what wretches to the bed pretend
Of that brave chief whose bow they could not bend!
In came a beggar of the strolling crew,
And did what all those princes could not do.'
Thus will the common voice our deed defame,
And thus posterity upbraid our name."

To whom the queen: "If fame engage your views,
Forbear those acts which infamy pursues;
Wrong and oppression no renown can raise;
Know, friend! that virtue is the path to praise.
The stature of our guest, his port, his face,
Speak him descended from no vulgar race.
To him the bow, as he desires, convey;
And to his hand if Phoebus give the day,
Hence, to reward his merit, be shall bear
A two-edged falchion and a shining spear,
Embroider'd sandals, a rich cloak and vest,
A safe conveyance to his port of rest."

"O royal mother! ever-honour'd name!
Permit me (cries Telemachus) to claim
A son's just right. No Grecian prince but I
Has power this bow to grant or to deny.
Of all that Ithaca's rough hills contain,
And all wide Elis' courser-breeding plain,
To me alone my father's arms descend;
And mine alone they are, to give or lend.
Retire, O queen! thy household task resume,
Tend, with thy maids, the labours of thy loom;
The bow, the darts, and arms of chivalry,
These cares to man belong, and most to me."

Mature beyond his years, the queen admired
His sage reply, and with her train retired;
There in her chamber as she sate apart,
Revolved his words, and placed them in her heart.
On her Ulysses then she fix'd her soul;
Down her fair cheek the tears abundant roll,
Till gentle Pallas, piteous of her cries,
In slumber closed her silver-streaming eyes.

Now through the press the bow Eumaeus bore,
And all was riot, noise, and wild uproar.
"Hold! lawless rustic! whither wilt thou go?
To whom, insensate, dost thou bear the bow?
Exiled for this to some sequester'd den,
Far from the sweet society of men,
To thy own dogs a prey thou shalt be made;
If Heaven and Phoebus lend the suitors aid."
Thus they. Aghast he laid the weapon down,
But bold Telemachus thus urged him on:
"Proceed, false slave, and slight their empty words:
What! hopes the fool to please so many lords?
Young as I am, thy prince's vengeful hand
Stretch'd forth in wrath shall drive thee from the land.
Oh! could the vigour of this arm as well
The oppressive suitors from my walls expel!
Then what a shoal of lawless men should go
To fill with tumult the dark courts below!"

The suitors with a scornful smile survey
The youth, indulging in the genial day.
Eumaeus, thus encouraged, hastes to bring
The strifeful bow and gives it to the king.
Old Euryclea calling them aside,
"Hear what Telemachus enjoins (he cried):
At every portal let some matron wait,
And each lock fast the well-compacted gate;
And if unusual sounds invade their ear,
If arms, or shouts, or dying groans they hear,
Let none to call or issue forth presume,
But close attend the labours of the loom."

Her prompt obedience on his order waits;
Closed in an instant were the palace gates.
In the same moment forth Philaetius flies,
Secures the court, and with a cable ties
The utmost gate (the cable strongly wrought
Of Byblos' reed, a ship from Egypt brought);
Then unperceived and silent at the board
His seat he takes, his eyes upon his lord.

And now his well-known bow the master bore,
Turn'd on all sides, and view'd it o'er and o'er;
Lest time or worms had done the weapon wrong,
Its owner absent, and untried so long.
While some deriding--"How he turns the bow!
Some other like it sure the man must know,
Or else would copy; or in bows he deals;
Perhaps he makes them, or perhaps he steals."
"Heaven to this wretch (another cried) be kind!
And bless, in all to which he stands inclined.
With such good fortune as he now shall find."

Heedless he heard them: but disdain'd reply;
The bow perusing with exactest eye.
Then, as some heavenly minstrel, taught to sing
High notes responsive to the trembling string,
To some new strain when he adapts the lyre,
Or the dumb lute refits with vocal wire,
Relaxes, strains, and draws them to and fro;
So the great master drew the mighty bow,
And drew with ease. One hand aloft display'd
The bending horns, and one the string essay'd.
From his essaying hand the string, let fly,
Twang'd short and sharp like the shrill swallow's cry.
A general horror ran through all the race,
Sunk was each heart, and pale was every face,
Signs from above ensued: the unfolding sky
In lightning burst; Jove thunder'd from on high.
Fired at the call of heaven's almighty Lord,
He snatch'd the shaft that glitter'd on the board
(Fast by, the rest lay sleeping in the sheath,
But soon to fly the messengers of death).

Now sitting as he was, the cord he drew,
Through every ringlet levelling his view:
Then notch'd the shaft, released, and gave it wing;
The whizzing arrow vanished from the string,
Sung on direct, and threaded every ring.
The solid gate its fury scarcely bounds;
Pierced through and through the solid gate resounds,
Then to the prince: "Nor have I wrought thee shame;
Nor err'd this hand unfaithful to its aim;
Nor prov'd the toil too hard; nor have I lost
That ancient vigour, once my pride and boast.
Ill I deserved these haughty peers' disdain;
Now let them comfort their dejected train,
In sweet repast their present hour employ,
Nor wait till evening for the genial joy:
Then to the lute's soft voice prolong the night;
Music, the banquet's most refined delight."

He said, then gave a nod; and at the word
Telemachus girds on his shining sword.
Fast by his father's side he takes his stand:
The beamy javelin lightens in his hand.

Then fierce the hero o'er the threshold strode;
Stripp'd of his rags, he blazed out like a god.
Full in their face the lifted bow he bore,
And quiver'd deaths, a formidable store;
Before his feet the rattling shower he threw,
And thus, terrific, to the suitor-crew:

"One venturous game this hand hath won to-day,
Another, princes! yet remains to play;
Another mark our arrow must attain.
Phoebus, assist! nor be the labour vain."
Swift as the word the parting arrow sings,
And bears thy fate, Antinous, on its wings:
Wretch that he was, of unprophetic soul!
High in his hands he rear'd the golden bowl!
E'en then to drain it lengthen'd out his breath;
Changed to the deep, the bitter draught of death:
For fate who fear'd amidst a feastful band?
And fate to numbers, by a single hand?
Full through his throat Ulysses' weapon pass'd,
And pierced his neck. He falls, and breathes his last.
The tumbling goblet the wide floor o'erflows,
A stream of gore burst spouting from his nose;
Grim in convulsive agonies be sprawls:
Before him spurn'd the loaded table falls,
And spreads the pavement with a mingled flood
Of floating meats, and wine, and human blood.
Amazed, confounded, as they saw him fall,
Up rose he throngs tumultuous round the hall:
O'er all the dome they cast a haggard eye,
Each look'd for arms--in vain; no arms were nigh:
"Aim'st thou at princes? (all amazed they said;)
Thy last of games unhappy hast thou play'd;
Thy erring shaft has made our bravest bleed,
And death, unlucky guest, attends thy deed.
Vultures shall tear thee." Thus incensed they spoke,
While each to chance ascribed the wondrous stroke:
Blind as they were: for death e'en now invades
His destined prey, and wraps them all in shades.
Then, grimly frowning, with a dreadful look,
That wither'd all their hearts, Ulysses spoke:

"Dogs, ye have had your day! ye fear'd no more
Ulysses vengeful from the Trojan shore;
While, to your lust and spoil a guardless prey,
Our house, our wealth, our helpless handmaids lay:
Not so content, with bolder frenzy fired,
E'en to our bed presumptuous you aspired:
Laws or divine or human fail'd to move,
Or shame of men, or dread of gods above;
Heedless alike of infamy or praise,
Or Fame's eternal voice in future days;
The hour of vengeance, wretches, now is come;
Impending fate is yours, and instant doom."

Thus dreadful he. Confused the suitors stood,
From their pale cheeks recedes the flying blood:
Trembling they sought their guilty heads to hide.
Alone the bold Eurymachus replied:

"If, as thy words import (he thus began),
Ulysses lives, and thou the mighty man,
Great are thy wrongs, and much hast thou sustain'd
In thy spoil'd palace, and exhausted land;
The cause and author of those guilty deeds,
Lo! at thy feet unjust Antinous bleeds
Not love, but wild ambition was his guide;
To slay thy son, thy kingdom to divide,
These were his aims; but juster Jove denied.
Since cold in death the offender lies, oh spare
Thy suppliant people, and receive their prayer!
Brass, gold, and treasures, shall the spoil defray,
Two hundred oxen every prince shall pay:
The waste of years refunded in a day.
Till then thy wrath is just." Ulysses burn'd
With high disdain, and sternly thus return'd:

"All, all the treasure that enrich'd our throne
Before your rapines, join'd with all your own,
If offer'd, vainly should for mercy call;
'Tis you that offer, and I scorn them all;
Your blood is my demand, your lives the prize,
Till pale as yonder wretch each suitor lies.
Hence with those coward terms; or fight or fly;
This choice is left you, to resist or die:
And die I trust ye shall." He sternly spoke:
With guilty fears the pale assembly shook.
Alone Eurymachus exhorts the train:
"Yon archer, comrades, will not shoot in vain;
But from the threshold shall his darts be sped,
(Whoe'er he be), till every prince lie dead?
Be mindful of yourselves, draw forth your swords,
And to his shafts obtend these ample boards
(So need compels). Then, all united, strive
The bold invader from his post to drive:
The city roused shall to our rescue haste,
And this mad archer soon have shot his last."
Swift as he spoke, he drew his traitor sword,
And like a lion rush'd against his lord:
The wary chief the rushing foe repress'd,
Who met the point and forced it in his breast:
His falling hand deserts the lifted sword,
And prone he falls extended o'er the board!
Before him wide, in mix'd effusion roll
The untasted viands, and the jovial bowl.
Full through his liver pass'd the mortal wound,
With dying rage his forehead beats the ground;
He spurn'd the seat with fury as he fell,
And the fierce soul to darkness dived, and hell.
Next bold Amphinomus his arm extends
To force the pass; the godlike man defends.
Thy spear, Telemachus, prevents the attack,
The brazen weapon driving through his back.
Thence through his breast its bloody passage tore;
Flat falls he thundering on the marble floor,
And his crush'd forehead marks the stone with gore.
He left his javelin in the dead, for fear
The long encumbrance of the weighty spear
To the fierce foe advantage might afford,
To rash between and use the shorten'd sword.
With speedy ardour to his sire he flies,
And, "Arm, great father! arm (in haste he cries).
Lo, hence I run for other arms to wield,
For missive javelins, and for helm and shield;
Fast by our side let either faithful swain
In arms attend us, and their part sustain."

"Haste, and return (Ulysses made reply)
While yet the auxiliar shafts this hand supply;
Lest thus alone, encounter'd by an host,
Driven from the gate, the important past be lost."

With speed Telemachus obeys, and flies
Where piled in heaps the royal armour lies;
Four brazen helmets, eight refulgent spears,
And four broad bucklers to his sire he bears:
At once in brazen panoply they shone.
At once each servant braced his armour on;
Around their king a faithful guard they stand.
While yet each shaft flew deathful from his hand:
Chief after chief expired at every wound,
And swell'd the bleeding mountain on the ground.
Soon as his store of flying fates was spent.
Against the wall he set the bow unbent;
And now his shoulders bear the massy shield,
And now his hands two beamy javelins wield:
He frowns beneath his nodding plume, that play'd
O'er the high crest, and cast a dreadful shade.

There stood a window near, whence looking down
From o'er the porch appear'd the subject town.
A double strength of valves secured the place,
A high and narrow; but the only pass:
The cautious king, with all-preventing care,
To guard that outlet, placed Eumaeus there;
When Agelaus thus: "Has none the sense
To mount yon window, and alarm from thence
The neighbour-town? the town shall force the door,
And this bold archer soon shall shoot no more."
Melanthius then: "That outlet to the gate
So near adjoins, that one may guard the strait.
But other methods of defence remain;
Myself with arms can furnish all the train;
Stores from the royal magazine I bring,
And their own darts shall pierce the prince and king."

He said; and mounting up the lofty stairs,
Twelve shields, twelve lances, and twelve helmets bears:
All arm, and sudden round the hall appears
A blaze of bucklers, and a wood of spears.

The hero stands oppress'd with mighty woe,
On every side he sees the labour grow;
"Oh cursed event! and oh unlook'd for aid!
Melanthius or the women have betray'd--
Oh my dear son!"--The father with a sigh
Then ceased; the filial virtue made reply;

"Falsehood is folly, and 'tis just to own
The fault committed: this was mine alone;
My haste neglected yonder door to bar,
And hence the villain has supplied their war.
Run, good Eumaeus, then, and (what before
I thoughtless err'd in) well secure that door:
Learn, if by female fraud this deed were done,
Or (as my thought misgives) by Dolius' son."

While yet they spoke, in quest of arms again
To the high chamber stole the faithless swain,
Not unobserved. Eumaeus watchful eyed,
And thus address'd Ulysses near his side:

"The miscreant we suspected takes that way;
Him, if this arm be powerful, shall I slay?
Or drive him hither, to receive the meed
From thy own hand, of this detested deed?"

"Not so (replied Ulysses); leave him there,
For us sufficient is another care;
Within the structure of this palace wall
To keep enclosed his masters till they fall.
Go you, and seize the felon; backward bind
His arms and legs, and fix a plank behind:
On this his body by strong cords extend,
And on a column near the roof suspend:
So studied tortures his vile days shall end."

The ready swains obey'd with joyful haste,
Behind the felon unperceived they pass'd,
As round the room in quest of arms he goes
(The half-shut door conceal'd his lurking foes):
One hand sustain'd a helm, and one the shield
Which old Laertes wont in youth to wield,
Cover'd with dust, with dryness chapp'd and worn,
The brass corroded, and the leather torn.
Thus laden, o'er the threshold as he stepp'd,
Fierce on the villain from each side they leap'd,
Back by the hair the trembling dastard drew,
And down reluctant on the pavement threw.
Active and pleased the zealous swains fulfil
At every point their master's rigid will;
First, fast behind, his hands and feet they bound,
Then straighten'd cords involved his body round;
So drawn aloft, athwart the column tied,
The howling felon swung from side to side.

Eumaeus scoffing then with keen disdain:
"There pass thy pleasing night, O gentle swain!
On that soft pillow, from that envied height,
First may'st thou see the springing dawn of light;
So timely rise, when morning streaks the east,
To drive thy victims to the suitors' feast."

This said, they, left him, tortured as he lay,
Secured the door, and hasty strode away:
Each, breathing death, resumed his dangerous post
Near great Ulysses; four against an host,
When lo! descending to her hero's aid,
Jove's daughter, Pallas, War's triumphant maid:
In Mentor's friendly form she join'd his side:
Ulysses saw, and thus with transport cried:

"Come, ever welcome, and thy succour lend;
O every sacred name in one, my friend!
Early we loved, and long our loves have grown;
Whate'er through life's whole series I have done,
Or good, or grateful, now to mind recall,
And, aiding this one hour, repay it all."

Thus he; but pleasing hopes his bosom warm
Of Pallas latent in the friendly form.
The adverse host the phantom-warrior eyed,
And first, loud-threatening, Agelaus cried:

"Mentor, beware, nor let that tongue persuade
Thy frantic arm to lend Ulysses aid;
Our force successful shall our threat make good,
And with the sire and son commix thy blood.
What hopest thou here? Thee first the sword shall slay,
Then lop thy whole posterity away;
Far hence thy banish'd consort shall we send;
With his thy forfeit lands and treasures blend;
Thus, and thus only, shalt thou join thy friend."

His barbarous insult even the goddess fires,
Who thus the warrior to revenge inspires:

"Art thou Ulysses? where then shall we find
The patient body and the constant mind?
That courage, once the Trojans' daily dread,
Known nine long years, and felt by heroes dead?
And where that conduct, which revenged the lust
Of Priam's race, and laid proud Troy in dust?
If this, when Helen was the cause, were done;
What for thy country now, thy queen, thy son?
Rise then in combat, at my side attend;
Observe what vigour gratitude can lend,
And foes how weak, opposed against a friend!"

She spoke; but willing longer to survey
The sire and son's great acts withheld the day!
By farther toils decreed the brave to try,
And level poised the wings of victory;
Then with a change of form eludes their sight,
Perch'd like a swallow on a rafter's height,
And unperceived enjoys the rising fight.

Damastor's son, bold Agelaus, leads,
The guilty war, Eurynomus succeeds;
With these, Pisander, great Polyctor's son,
Sage Polybus, and stern Amphimedon,
With Demoptolemus: these six survive:
The best of all the shafts had left alive.
Amidst the carnage, desperate as they stand,
Thus Agelaus roused the lagging band:

"The hour has come, when yon fierce man no more
With bleeding princes shall bestrew the floor;
Lo! Mentor leaves him with an empty boast;
The four remain, but four against an host.
Let each at once discharge the deadly dart,
One sure of six shall reach Ulysses' heart:
The rest must perish, their great leader slain:
Thus shall one stroke the glory lost regain."

Then all at once their mingled lances threw,
And thirsty all of one man's blood they flew;
In vain! Minerva turned them with her breath,
And scattered short, or wide, the points of death!
With deaden'd sound one on the threshold falls,
One strikes the gate, one rings against the walls:
The storm passed innocent. The godlike man
Now loftier trod, and dreadful thus began:
"'Tis now (brave friends) our turn, at once to throw,
(So speed them Heaven) our javelins at the foe.
That impious race to all their past misdeeds
Would add our blood, injustice still proceeds."

He spoke: at once their fiery lances flew:
Great Demoptolemus Ulysses slew;
Euryades received the prince's dart;
The goatherd's quiver'd in Pisander's heart;
Fierce Elatus by thine, Eumaeus, falls;
Their fall in thunder echoes round the walls.
The rest retreat: the victors now advance,
Each from the dead resumes his bloody lance.
Again the foe discharge the steely shower;
Again made frustrate by the virgin-power.
Some, turn'd by Pallas, on the threshold fall,
Some wound the gate, some ring against the wall;
Some weak, or ponderous with the brazen head,
Drop harmless on the pavement, sounding dead.

Then bold Amphimedon his javelin cast:
Thy hand, Telemachus, it lightly razed:
And from Ctesippus' arm the spear elanced:
On good Eumaeus' shield and shoulder glanced;
Not lessened of their force (so light the wound)
Each sung along and dropped upon the ground.
Fate doom'd thee next, Eurydamus, to bear,
Thy death ennobled by Ulysses' spear.
By the bold son Amphimedon was slain,
And Polybus renown'd, the faithful swain.
Pierced through the breast the rude Ctesippus bled,
And thus Philaetius gloried o'er the dead:

"There end thy pompous vaunts and high disdain;
O sharp in scandal, voluble and vain!
How weak is mortal pride! To Heaven alone
The event of actions and our fates are known:
Scoffer, behold what gratitude we bear:
The victim's heel is answered with this spear."

Ulysses brandish'd high his vengeful steel,
And Damastorides that instant fell:
Fast by Leocritus expiring lay,
The prince's javelin tore its bloody way
Through all his bowels: down he tumbled prone,
His batter'd front and brains besmear the stone.

Now Pallas shines confess'd; aloft she spreads
The arm of vengeance o'er their guilty heads:
The dreadful aegis blazes in their eye:
Amazed they see, they tremble, and they fly:
Confused, distracted, through he rooms they fling:
Like oxen madden'd by the breeze's sting,
When sultry days, and long, succeed the gentle spring,
Not half so keen fierce vultures of the chase
Stoop from the mountains on the feather'd race,
When, the wide field extended snares beset,
With conscious dread they shun the quivering net:
No help, no flight; but wounded every way,
Headlong they drop; the fowlers seize their prey.
On all sides thus they double wound on wound,
In prostrate heaps the wretches beat the ground,
Unmanly shrieks precede each dying groan,
And a red deluge floats the reaking stone.

Leiodes first before the victor falls:
The wretched augur thus for mercy calls:
"Oh gracious hear, nor let thy suppliant bleed;
Still undishonoured, or by word or deed,
Thy house, for me remains; by me repress'd
Full oft was check'd the injustice of the rest:
Averse they heard me when I counselled well,
Their hearts were harden'd, and they justly fell.
O spare an augur's consecrated head,
Nor add the blameless to the guilty dead."

"Priest as thou art! for that detested band
Thy lying prophecies deceived the land;
Against Ulysses have thy vows been made,
For them thy daily orisons were paid:
Yet more, e'en to our bed thy pride aspires:
One common crime one common fate requires."

Thus speaking, from the ground the sword he took
Which Agelaus' dying hand forsook:
Full through his neck the weighty falchion sped;
Along the pavement roll'd the muttering head.

Phemius alone the hand of vengeance spared,
Phemius the sweet, the heaven-instructed bard.
Beside the gate the reverend minstrel stands;
The lyre now silent trembling in his hands;
Dubious to supplicate the chief, or fly
To Jove's inviolable altar nigh,
Where oft Laertes holy vows had paid,
And oft Ulysses smoking victims laid.
His honour'd harp with care he first set down,
Between the laver and the silver throne;
Then prostrate stretch'd before the dreadful man,
Persuasive thus, with accent soft began:

"O king! to mercy be thy soul inclined,
And spare the poet's ever-gentle kind.
A deed like this thy future fame would wrong,
For dear to gods and men is sacred song.
Self-taught I sing; by Heaven, and Heaven alone,
The genuine seeds of poesy are sown:
And (what the gods bestow) the lofty lay
To gods alone and godlike worth we pay.
Save then the poet, and thyself reward!
'Tis thine to merit, mine is to record.
That here I sung, was force, and not desire;
This hand reluctant touch'd the warbling wire;
And let thy son attest, nor sordid pay,
Nor servile flattery, stain'd the moral lay."

The moving words Telemachus attends,
His sire approaches, and the bard defends.
"O mix not, father, with those impious dead
The man divine! forbear that sacred head;
Medon, the herald, too, our arms may spare,
Medon, who made my infancy his care;
If yet he breathes, permit thy son to give
Thus much to gratitude, and bid him live."

Beneath a table, trembling with dismay,
Couch'd close to earth, unhappy Medon lay,
Wrapp'd in a new-slain ox's ample hide;
Swift at the word he cast his screen aside,
Sprung to the prince, embraced his knee with tears,
And thus with grateful voice address'd his ears

"O prince! O friend! lo, here thy Medon stands
Ah stop the hero's unresisted hands,
Incensed too justly by that impious brood,
Whose guilty glories now are set in blood."
To whom Ulysses with a pleasing eye:

"Be bold, on friendship and my son rely;
Live, an example for the world to read,
How much more safe the good than evil deed:
Thou, with the heaven-taught bard, in peace resort
From blood and carnage to yon open court:
Me other work requires." With timorous awe
From the dire scene the exempted two withdraw,
Scarce sure of life, look round, and trembling move
To the bright altars of Protector Jove.

Meanwhile Ulysses search'd the dome, to find
If yet there live of all the offending kind.
Not one! complete the bloody tale he found,
All steep'd in blood, all gasping on the ground.
So, when by hollow shores the fisher-train
Sweep with their arching nets the roaring main,
And scarce the meshy toils the copious draught contain,
All naked of their element, and bare,
The fishes pant, and gasp in thinner air;
Wide o'er the sands are spread the stiffening prey,
Till the warm sun exhales their soul away.

And now the king commands his son to call
Old Euryclea to the deathful hall:
The son observant not a moment stays;
The aged governess with speed obeys;
The sounding portals instant they display;
The matron moves, the prince directs the way.
On heaps of death the stern Ulysses stood,
All black with dust, and cover'd thick with blood.
So the grim lion from the slaughter comes,
Dreadful lie glares, and terribly he foams,
His breast with marks of carnage painted o'er,
His jaws all dropping with the bull's black gore.

Soon as her eyes the welcome object met,
The guilty fall'n, the mighty deed complete;
A scream of joy her feeble voice essay'd;
The hero check'd her, and composedly said.

"Woman, experienced as thou art, control
Indecent joy, and feast thy secret soul.
To insult the dead is cruel and unjust;
Fate and their crime have sunk them to the dust.
Nor heeded these the censure of mankind,
The good and bad were equal in their mind
Justly the price of worthlessness they paid,
And each now wails an unlamented shade.
But thou sincere! O Euryclea, say,
What maids dishonour us, and what obey?"

Then she: "In these thy kingly walls remain
(My son) full fifty of the handmaid train,
Taught by my care to cull the fleece or weave,
And servitude with pleasing tasks deceive;
Of these, twice six pursue their wicked way,
Nor me, nor chaste Penelope obey;
Nor fits it that Telemachus command
(Young as he is) his mother's female band.
Hence to the upper chambers let me fly
Where slumbers soft now close the royal eye;
There wake her with the news"--the matron cried
"Not so (Ulysses, more sedate, replied),
Bring first the crew who wrought these guilty deeds."
In haste the matron parts: the king proceeds;
"Now to dispose the dead, the care remains
To you, my son, and you, my faithfull swains;
The offending females to that task we doom,
To wash, to scent, and purify the room;
These (every table cleansed, and every throne,
And all the melancholy labour done)
Drive to yon court, without the palace wall,
There the revenging sword shall smite them all;
So with the suitors let them mix in dust,
Stretch'd in a long oblivion of their lust."
He said: the lamentable train appear,
Each vents a groan, and drops a tender tear;
Each heaved her mournful burden, and beneath
The porch deposed the ghastly heap of death.
The chief severe, compelling each to move,
Urged the dire task imperious from above;
With thirsty sponge they rub the tables o'er
(The swains unite their toil); the walls, the floor,
Wash'd with the effusive wave, are purged of gore.
Once more the palace set in fair array,
To the base court the females take their way;
There compass'd close between the dome and wall
(Their life's last scene) they trembling wait their fall.

Then thus the prince: "To these shall we afford
A fate so pure as by the martial sword?
To these, the nightly prostitutes to shame,
And base revilers of our house and name?"

Thus speaking, on the circling wall he strung
A ship's tough cable from a column hung;
Near the high top he strain'd it strongly round,
Whence no contending foot could reach the ground.
Their heads above connected in a row,
They beat the air with quivering feet below:
Thus on some tree hung struggling in the snare,
The doves or thrushes flap their wings in air.
Soon fled the soul impure, and left behind
The empty corse to waver with the wind.

Then forth they led Melanthius, and began
Their bloody work; they lopp'd away the man,
Morsel for dogs! then trimm'd with brazen shears
The wretch, and shorten'd of his nose and ears;
His hands and feet last felt the cruel steel:
He roar'd, and torments gave his soul to hell.
They wash, and to Ulysses take their way:
So ends the bloody business of the day.

To Euryclea then address'd the king:
("Bring hither fire, and hither sulphur bring,
To purge the palace: then the queen attend,
And let her with her matron-train descend;
The matron-train, with all the virgin-band,
Assemble here, to learn their lord's command."

Then Euryclea: "Joyful I obey,
But cast those mean dishonest rags away;
Permit me first the royal robes to bring:
Ill suits this garb the shoulders of a king."
"Bring sulphur straight, and fire" (the monarch cries).
She hears, and at the word obedient flies.
With fire and sulphur, cure of noxious fumes,
He purged the walls, and blood-polluted rooms.
Again the matron springs with eager pace,
And spreads her lord's return from place to place.
They hear, rush forth, and instant round him stand,
A gazing throng, a torch in every hand.
They saw, they knew him, and with fond embrace
Each humbly kiss'd his knee, or hand, or face;
He knows them all, in all such truth appears,
E'en he indulges the sweet joy of tears.

Then to the queen, as in repose she lay,
The nurse with eager rapture speeds her way:
The transports of her faithful heart supply
A sudden youth, and give her wings to fly.

"And sleeps my child? (the reverend matron cries)
Ulysses lives! arise, my child, arise!
At length appears the long-expected hour!
Ulysses comes! the suitors are no more!
No more they view the golden light of day!
Arise, and bless thee with the glad survey?"

Touch'd at her words, the mournful queen rejoin'd:
"Ah! whither wanders thy distemper'd mind?
The righteous powers, who tread the starry skies,
The weak enlighten, and confound the wise,
And human thought, with unresisted sway,
Depress or raise, enlarge or take away:
Truth, by their high decree, thy voice forsakes,
And folly with the tongue of wisdom speaks.
Unkind, the fond illusion to impose!
Was it to flatter or deride my woes?
Never did I sleep so sweet enjoy,
Since my dear lord left Ithaca for Troy.
Why must I wake to grieve, and curse thy shore,
O Troy?--may never tongue pronounce thee more!
Begone! another might have felt our rage,
But age is sacred, and we spare thy age."

To whom with warmth: "My soul a lie disdains;
Ulysses lives, thy own Ulysses reigns:
That stranger, patient of the suitors' wrongs,
And the rude license of ungovern'd tongues!
He, he is thine! Thy son his latent guest
Long knew, but lock'd the secret in his breast:
With well concerted art to end his woes,
And burst at once in vengeance on the foes."

While yet she spoke, the queen in transport sprung
Swift from the couch, and round the matron hung;
Fast from her eye descends the rolling tear:
"Say, once more say, is my Ulysses here?
How could that numerous and outrageous band
By one be slain, though by a hero's hand?"

"I saw it not (she cries), but heard alone,
When death was busy, a loud dying groan;
The damsel-train turn'd pale at every wound,
Immured we sate, and catch'd each passing sound;
When death had seized her prey, thy son attends,
And at his nod the damsel-train descends;
There terrible in arms Ulysses stood,
And the dead suitors almost swam in blood:
Thy heart had leap'd the hero to survey,
Stern as the surly lion o'er his prey,
Glorious in gore, now with sulphereous fire
The dome he purges, now the flame aspires;
Heap'd lie the dead without the palace walls--
Haste, daughter, haste, thy own Ulysses calls!
Thy every wish the bounteous gods bestow;
Enjoy the present good, and former woe.
Ulysses lives, his vanquish'd foes to see;
He lives to thy Telemachus and thee!"

"Ah, no! (with sighs Penelope rejoin'd,)
Excess of joy disturbs thy wandering mind;
How blest this happy hour, should he appear,
Dear to us all, to me supremely dear;
Ah, no! some god the suitors death decreed,
Some god descends, and by his hand they bleed;
Blind! to contemn the stranger's righteous cause,
And violate all hospitable laws!
The good they hated, and the powers defied!
But heaven is just, and by a god they died.
For never must Ulysses view this shore;
Never! the loved Ulysses is no more!"

"What words (the matron cries) have reach'd my ears?
Doubt we his presence, when he now appears!
Then hear conviction: Ere the fatal day
That forced Ulysses o'er the watery way,
A boar, fierce rushing in the sylvan war,
Plough'd half his thigh; I saw, I saw the scar,
And wild with transport had reveal'd the wound;
But ere I spoke, he rose, and check'd the sound.
Then, daughter, haste away! and if a lie
Flow from this tongue, then let thy servant die!"
To whom with dubious joy the queen replies:
"Wise is thy soul, but errors seize the wise;
The works of gods what mortal can survey?
Who knows their motives, who shall trace their way?
But learn we instant how the suitors trod
The paths of death, by man, or by a god."
Thus speaks the queen, and no reply attends,
But with alternate joy and fear descends;
At every step debates her lord to prove;
Or, rushing to his arms, confess her love!
Then gliding through the marble valves, in state
Opposed, before the shining sire she sate.
The monarch, by a column high enthroned,
His eye withdrew, and fix'd it on the ground;
Curious to hear his queen the silence break:
Amazed she sate, and impotent to speak;
O'er all the man her eyes she rolls in vain,
Now hopes, now fears, now knows, then doubts again.
At length Telemachus: "Oh, who can find
A woman like Penelope unkind?
Why thus in silence? why with winning charms
Thus slow to fly with rapture to his arms?
Stubborn the breast that with no transport glows,
When twice ten years are pass'd of mighty woes;
To softness lost, to spousal love unknown,
The gods have formed that rigid heart of stone!"
"O my Telemachus! (the queen rejoin'd,)
Distracting fears confound my labouring mind;
Powerless to speak. I scarce uplift my eyes,
Nor dare to question; doubts on doubts arise.
Oh deign he, if Ulysses, to remove
These boding thoughts, and what he is, to prove!"
Pleased with her virtuous fears, the king replies:
"Indulge, my son, the cautions of the wise;
Time shall the truth to sure remembrance bring:
This garb of poverty belies the king:
No more. This day our deepest care requires,
Cautious to act what thought mature inspires.
If one man's blood, though mean, distain our hands,
The homicide retreats to foreign lands;
By us, in heaps the illustrious peerage falls,
The important deed our whole attention calls."

"Be that thy care (Telemachus replies)
The world conspires to speak Ulysses wise;
For wisdom all is thine! lo, I obey,
And dauntless follow where you led the way;
Nor shalt thou in the day of danger find
Thy coward son degenerate lag behind."

"Then instant to the bath (the monarch cries),
Bid the gay youth and sprightly virgins rise,
Thence all descend in pomp and proud array,
And bid the dome resound the mirthful lay;
While the sweet lyrist airs of rapture sings,
And forms the dance responsive to the strings,
That hence the eluded passengers may say,
'Lo! the queen weds! we hear the spousal lay!'
The suitor's death, unknown, till we remove
Far from the court, and act inspired by Jove."

Thus spoke the king: the observant train obey,
At once they bathe, and dress in proud array:
The lyrist strikes the string; gay youths advance,
And fair-zoned damsels form the sprightly dance.
The voice, attuned to instrumental sounds,
Ascends the roof, the vaulted roof rebounds;
Not unobserved: the Greeks eluded say,
"Lo! the queen weds, we hear the spousal lay!
Inconstant! to admit the bridal hour."
Thus they--but nobly chaste she weds no more.

Meanwhile the wearied king the bath ascends;
With faithful cares Eurynome attends,
O'er every limb a shower of fragrance sheds;
Then, dress'd in pomp, magnificent he treads.
The warrior-goddess gives his frame to shine
With majesty enlarged, and grace divine.
Back from his brows in wavy ringlets fly
His thick large locks of hyacinthine dye.
As by some artist to whom Vulcan gives
His heavenly skill, a breathing image lives;
By Pallas taught, he frames the wondrous mould,
And the pale silver glows with fusile gold:
So Pallas his heroic form improves
With bloom divine, and like a god he moves!
More high he treads, and issuing forth in state,
Radiant before his gazing consort sate.
"And, O my queen! (he cries) what power above
Has steel'd that heart, averse to spousal love?
Canst thou, Penelope, when heaven restores
Thy lost Ulysses to his native shores,
Canst thou, O cruel! unconcern'd survey
Thy lost Ulysses, on this signal day?
Haste, Euryclea, and despatchful spread
For me, and me alone, the imperial bed,
My weary nature craves the balm of rest.
But Heaven with adamant has arm'd her breast."

"Ah no! (she cries) a tender heart I bear,
A foe to pride: no adamant is there;
And now, e'en now it melts! for sure I see
Once more Ulysses my beloved in thee!
Fix'd in my soul, as when he sailed to Troy,
His image dwells: then haste the bed of joy,
Haste, from the bridal bower the bed translate,
Fram'd by his hand, and be it dress'd in state!"

Thus speaks the queen, still dubious, with disguise
Touch'd at her words, the king with warmth replies
"Alas for this! what mortal strength can move
The enormous burden, who but Heaven above?
It mocks the weak attempts of human hands!
But the whole earth must move if Heaven commands
Then hear sure evidence, while we display
Words seal'd with sacred truth and truth obey:
This hand the wonder framed; an olive spread
Full in the court its ever verdant head.
Vast as some mighty column's bulk, on high
The huge trunk rose, and heaved into the sky;
Around the tree I raised a nuptial bower,
And roof'd defensive of the storm and shower;
The spacious valve, with art inwrought conjoins;
And the fair dome with polished marble shines.
I lopp'd the branchy head: aloft in twain
Sever'd the bole, and smoothed the shining grain;
Then posts, capacious of the frame, I raise,
And bore it, regular, from space to space:
Athwart the frame, at equal distance lie
Thongs of tough hides, that boast a purple dye;
Then polishing the whole, the finished mould
With silver shone, with elephant, and gold.
But if o'erturn'd by rude, ungovern'd hands,
Or still inviolate the olive stands,
'Tis thine, O queen, to say, and now impart,
If fears remain, or doubts distract thy heart."

While yet he speaks, her powers of life decay;
She sickens, trembles, falls, and faints away.
At length recovering, to his arms she flew,
And strain'd him close, as to his breast she grew.
The tears pour'd down amain, and "O (she cries)
Let not against thy spouse thine anger rise!
O versed in every, turn of human art,
Forgive the weakness of a woman's heart!
The righteous powers, that mortal lot dispose,
Decree us to sustain a length of woes.
And from the flower of life the bliss deny
To bloom together, fade away, and die.
O let me, let me not thine anger move,
That I forbore, thus, thus to speak my love:
Thus in fond kisses, while the transport warms
Pour out my soul and die within thine arms!
I dreaded fraud! Men, faithless men, betray
Our easy faith, and make our sex their prey:
Against the fondness of my heart I strove:
'Twas caution, O my lord! not want of love.
Like me had Helen fear'd, with wanton charms
Ere the fair mischief set two worlds in arms;
Ere Greece rose dreadful in the avenging day;
Thus had she fear'd, she had not gone astray.
But Heaven, averse to Greece, in wrath decreed
That she should wander, and that Greece should bleed:
Blind to the ills that from injustice flow,
She colour'd all our wretched lives with woe.
But why these sorrows when my lord arrives?
I yield, I yield! my own Ulysses lives!
The secrets of the bridal bed are known
To thee, to me, to Actoris alone
(My father's present in the spousal hour,
The sole attendant on our genial bower).
Since what no eye hath seen thy tongue reveal'd,
Hard and distrustful as I am, I yield."

Touch'd to the soul, the king with rapture hears,
Hangs round her neck, and speaks his joy in tears.
As to the shipwreck'd mariner, the shores
Delightful rise, when angry Neptune roars:
Then, when the surge in thunder mounts the sky,
And gulf'd in crowds at once the sailors die;
If one, more happy, while the tempest raves,
Outlives the tumult of conflicting waves,
All pale, with ooze deform'd, he views the strand,
And plunging forth with transport grasps the land:
The ravish'd queen with equal rapture glows,
Clasps her loved lord, and to his bosom grows.
Nor had they ended till the morning ray,
But Pallas backward held the rising day,
The wheels of night retarding, to detain
The gay Aurora in the wavy main;
Whose flaming steeds, emerging through the night.
Beam o'er the eastern hills with streaming light.

At length Ulysses with a sigh replies:
"Yet Fate, yet cruel Fate repose denies;
A labour long, and hard, remains behind;
By heaven above, by hell beneath enjoin'd:
For to Tiresias through the eternal gates
Of hell I trode, to learn my future fates.
But end we here--the night demands repose,
Be deck'd the couch! and peace awhile, my woes!"

To whom the queen: "Thy word we shall obey,
And deck the couch; far hence be woes away:
Since the just gods, who tread the starry plains,
Restore thee safe, since my Ulysses reigns.
But what those perils heaven decrees, impart;
Knowledge may grieve, but fear distracts the heart."

To this the king: "Ah, why must I disclose
A dreadful story of approaching woes?
Why in this hour of transport wound thy ears,
When thou must learn what I must speak with tears?
Heaven, by the Theban ghost, thy spouse decrees,
Torn from thy arms, to sail a length of seas;
From realm to realm, a nation to explore
Who ne'er knew salt, or heard the billows roar,
Nor saw gay vessel storm the surgy plain,
A painted wonder, flying on the main:
An oar my hand must bear; a shepherd eyes
The unknown instrument with strange surprise,
And calls a corn-van; this upon the plain
I fix, and hail the monarch of the main;
Then bathe his altars with the mingled gore
Of victims vow'd, a ram, a bull, a boar;
Thence swift re-sailing to my native shores,
Due victims slay to all the ethereal powers.
Then Heaven decrees, in peace to end my days
And steal myself from life by slow decays!
Unknown to pain, in age resign my breath,
When late stern Neptune points the shaft of death;
To the dark grave retiring as to rest;
My people blessing, by my people bless'd.
Such future scenes the all-righteous powers display
By their dread seer, and such my future day."

To whom thus firm of soul: "If ripe for death,
And full of days, thou gently yield thy breath;
While Heaven a kind release from ills foreshows,
Triumph, thou happy victor of thy woes?"

But Euryclea, with dispatchful care,
And sage Eurynome, the couch prepare;
Instant they bid the blazing torch display
Around the dome and artificial day;
Then to repose her steps the matron bends,
And to the queen Eurynome descends;
A torch she bears, to light with guiding fires
The royal pair; she guides them, and retires
The instant his fair spouse Ulysses led
To the chaste love-rites of the nuptial bed.

And now the blooming youths and sprightly fair
Cease the gay dance, and to their rest repair;
But in discourse the king and consort lay,
While the soft hours stole unperceived away;
Intent he hears Penelope disclose
A mournful story of domestic woes,
His servants' insults, his invaded bed,
How his whole flocks and herds exhausted bled,
His generous wines dishonour'd shed in vain,
And the wild riots of the suitor-train.
The king alternate a dire tale relates,
Of wars, of triumphs, and disastrous fates;
All he unfolds; his listening spouse turns pale
With pleasing horror at the dreadful tale;
Sleepless devours each word; and hears how slain
Cicons on Cicons swell the ensanguined plain;
How to the land of Lote unbless'd he sails;
And images the rills and flowery vales!
How dash'd like dogs, his friends the Cyclops tore
(Not unrevenged), and quaff'd the spouting gore;
How the loud storms in prison bound, he sails
From friendly Aeolus with prosperous gales:
Yet fate withstands! a sudden tempest roars,
And whirls him groaning from his native shores:
How on the barbarous Laestrigonian coast,
By savage hands his fleet and friends lie lost;
How scarce himself survived: he paints the bower,
The spells of Circe, and her magic power;
His dreadful journey to the realms beneath,
To seek Tiresias in the vales of death;
How in the doleful mansions lie survey'd
His royal mother, pale Anticlea's shade;
And friends in battle slain, heroic ghosts!
Then how, unharm'd, he pass'd the Syren-coasts,
The justling rocks where fierce Charybdis raves,
And howling Scylla whirls her thunderous waves,
The cave of death! How his companions slay
The oxen sacred to the god of day.
Till Jove in wrath the rattling tempest guides,
And whelms the offenders in the roaring tides:
How struggling through the surge lie reach'd the shores
Of fair Ogygia and Calypso's bowers;
Where the bay blooming nymph constrain'd his stay,
With sweet, reluctant, amorous delay;
And promised, vainly promised, to bestow
Immortal life, exempt from age and woe:
How saved from storms Phaeacia's coast he trod,
By great Alcinous honour'd as a god,
Who gave him last his country to behold,
With change of raiment, brass, and heaps of gold

He ended, sinking into sleep, and shares
A sweet forgetfulness of all his cares.

Soon as soft slumber eased the toils of day,
Minerva rushes through the aerial way,
And bids Aurora with her golden wheels
Flame from the ocean o'er the eastern hills;
Uprose Ulysses from the genial bed,
And thus with thought mature the monarch said:

"My queen, my consort! through a length of years
We drank the cup of sorrow mix'd with tears;
Thou, for thy lord; while me the immortal powers
Detain'd reluctant from my native shores.
Now, bless'd again by Heaven, the queen display,
And rule our palace with an equal sway.
Be it my care, by loans, or martial toils,
To throng my empty folds with gifts or spoils.
But now I haste to bless Laertes' eyes
With sight of his Ulysses ere he dies;
The good old man, to wasting woes a prey,
Weeps a sad life in solitude away.
But hear, though wise! This morning shall unfold
The deathful scene, on heroes heroes roll'd.
Thou with thy maids within the palace stay,
From all the scene of tumult far away!"

He spoke, and sheathed in arms incessant flies
To wake his son, and bid his friends arise.
"To arms!" aloud he cries; his friends obey,
With glittering arms their manly limbs array,
And pass the city gate; Ulysses leads the way.
Now flames the rosy dawn, but Pallas shrouds
The latent warriors in a veil of clouds.

Cylenius now to Pluto's dreary reign
Conveys the dead, a lamentable train!
The golden wand, that causes sleep to fly,
Or in soft slumber seals the wakeful eye,
That drives the ghosts to realms of night or day,
Points out the long uncomfortable way.
Trembling the spectres glide, and plaintive vent
Thin, hollow screams, along the deep descent.
As in the cavern of some rifted den,
Where flock nocturnal bats, and birds obscene;
Cluster'd they hang, till at some sudden shock
They move, and murmurs run through all the rock!
So cowering fled the sable heaps of ghosts,
And such a scream fill'd all the dismal coasts.
And now they reach'd the earth's remotest ends,
And now the gates where evening Sol descends,
And Leucas' rock, and Ocean's utmost streams,
And now pervade the dusky land of dreams,
And rest at last, where souls unbodied dwell
In ever-flowing meads of asphodel.
The empty forms of men inhabit there,
Impassive semblance, images of air!
Naught else are all that shined on earth before:
Ajax and great Achilles are no more!
Yet still a master ghost, the rest he awed,
The rest adored him, towering as he trod;
Still at his side is Nestor's son survey'd,
And loved Patroclus still attends his shade.

New as they were to that infernal shore,
The suitors stopp'd, and gazed the hero o'er.
When, moving slow, the regal form they view'd
Of great Atrides: him in pomp pursued
And solemn sadness through the gloom of hell,
The train of those who by AEgysthus fell:

"O mighty chief! (Pelides thus began)
Honour'd by Jove above the lot of man!
King of a hundred kings! to whom resign'd
The strongest, bravest, greatest of mankind
Comest thou the first, to view this dreary state?
And was the noblest, the first mark of Fate,
Condemn'd to pay the great arrear so soon,
The lot, which all lament, and none can shun!
Oh! better hadst thou sunk in Trojan ground,
With all thy full-blown honours cover'd round;
Then grateful Greece with streaming eyes might raise
Historic marbles to record thy praise:
Thy praise eternal on the faithful stone
Had with transmissive glories graced thy son.
But heavier fates were destined to attend:
What man is happy, till he knows his end?"

"O son of Peleus! greater than mankind!
(Thus Agamemnon's kingly shade rejoin'd)
Thrice happy thou, to press the martial plain
'Midst heaps of heroes in thy quarrel slain:
In clouds of smoke raised by the noble fray,
Great and terrific e'en in death you lay,
And deluges of blood flow'd round you every way.
Nor ceased the strife till Jove himself opposed,
And all in Tempests the dire evening closed.
Then to the fleet we bore thy honour'd load,
And decent on the funeral bed bestow'd;
Then unguents sweet and tepid streams we shed;
Tears flow'd from every eye, and o'er the dead
Each clipp'd the curling honours of his head.
Struck at the news, thy azure mother came,
The sea-green sisters waited on the dame:
A voice of loud lament through all the main
Was heard; and terror seized the Grecian train:
Back to their ships the frighted host had fled;
But Nestor spoke, they listen'd and obey'd
(From old experience Nestor's counsel springs,
And long vicissitudes of human things):
'Forbear your flight: fair Thetis from the main
To mourn Achilles leads her azure train.'
Around thee stand the daughters of the deep,
Robe thee in heavenly vests, and round thee weep:
Round thee, the Muses, with alternate strain,
In ever-consecrating verse, complain.
Each warlike Greek the moving music hears,
And iron-hearted heroes melt in tears.
Till seventeen nights and seventeen days return'd
All that was mortal or immortal mourn'd,
To flames we gave thee, the succeeding day,
And fatted sheep and sable oxen slay;
With oils and honey blazed the augmented fires,
And, like a god adorn'd, thy earthly part expires.
Unnumber'd warriors round the burning pile
Urge the fleet coursers or the racer's toil;
Thick clouds of dust o'er all the circle rise,
And the mix'd clamour thunders in the skies.
Soon as absorb'd in all-embracing flame
Sunk what was mortal of thy mighty name,
We then collect thy snowy bones, and place
With wines and unguents in a golden vase
(The vase to Thetis Bacchus gave of old,
And Vulcan's art enrich'd the sculptured gold).
There, we thy relics, great Achilles! blend
With dear Patroclus, thy departed friend:
In the same urn a separate space contains
Thy next beloved, Antilochus' remains.
Now all the sons of warlike Greece surround
Thy destined tomb and cast a mighty mound;
High on the shore the growing hill we raise,
That wide the extended Hellespont surveys;
Where all, from age to age, who pass the coast,
May point Achilles' tomb, and hail the mighty ghost.
Thetis herself to all our peers proclaims
Heroic prizes and exequial games;
The gods assented; and around thee lay
Rich spoils and gifts that blazed against the day.
Oft have I seen with solemn funeral games
Heroes and kings committed to the flames;
But strength of youth, or valour of the brave,
With nobler contest ne'er renown'd a grave.
Such were the games by azure Thetis given,
And such thy honours, O beloved of Heaven!
Dear to mankind thy fame survives, nor fades
Its bloom eternal in the Stygian shades.
But what to me avail my honours gone,
Successful toils, and battles bravely won?
Doom'd by stern Jove at home to end my life,
By cursed Aegysthus, and a faithless wife!"
Thus they: while Hermes o'er the dreary plain
Led the sad numbers by Ulysses slain.
On each majestic form they cast a view,
And timorous pass'd, and awfully withdrew.
But Agamemnon, through the gloomy shade,
His ancient host Amphimedon survey'd:
"Son of Melanthius! (he began) O say!
What cause compell'd so many, and so gay,
To tread the downward, melancholy way?
Say, could one city yield a troop so fair?
Were all these partners of one native air?
Or did the rage of stormy Neptune sweep
Your lives at once, and whelm beneath the deep?
Did nightly thieves, or pirates' cruel bands,
Drench with your blood your pillaged country's sands?
Or well-defending some beleaguer'd wall,
Say,--for the public did ye greatly fall?
Inform thy guest: for such I was of yore
When our triumphant navies touch'd your shore;
Forced a long month the wintry seas to bear,
To move the great Ulysses to the war."

"O king of men! I faithful shall relate
(Replied Amphimedon) our hapless fate.
Ulysses absent, our ambitious aim
With rival loves pursued his royal dame;
Her coy reserve, and prudence mix'd with pride,
Our common suit nor granted, nor denied;
But close with inward hate our deaths design'd;
Versed in all arts of wily womankind.
Her hand, laborious, in delusion spread
A spacious loom, and mix'd the various thread.
'Ye peers (she cried) who press to gain my heart,
Where dead Ulysses claims no more a part,
Yet a short space your rival suit suspend,
Till this funereal web my labours end:
Cease, till to good Laertes I bequeath
A task of grief, his ornaments of death:
Lest when the Fates his royal ashes claim,
The Grecian matrons taint my spotless fame;
Should he, long honour'd with supreme command,
Want the last duties of a daughter's hand.'

"The fiction pleased, our generous train complies,
Nor fraud mistrusts in virtue's fair disguise.
The work she plied, but studious of delay,
Each following night reversed the toils of day.
Unheard, unseen, three years her arts prevail;
The fourth, her maid reveal'd the amazing tale,
And show'd as unperceived we took our stand,
The backward labours of her faithless hand.
Forced she completes it; and before us lay
The mingled web, whose gold and silver ray
Display'd the radiance of the night and day.

"Just as she finished her illustrious toil,
Ill fortune led Ulysses to our isle.
Far in a lonely nook, beside the sea,
At an old swineherd's rural lodge he lay:
Thither his son from sandy Pyle repairs,
And speedy lands, and secretly confers.
They plan our future ruin, and resort
Confederate to the city and the court.
First came the son; the father nest succeeds,
Clad like a beggar, whom Eumaeus leads;
Propp'd on a staff, deform'd with age and care,
And hung with rags that flutter'd in the air.
Who could Ulysses in that form behold?
Scorn'd by the young, forgotten by the old,
Ill-used by all! to every wrong resigned,
Patient he suffered with a constant mind.
But when, arising in his wrath to obey
The will of Jove, he gave the vengeance way:
The scattered arms that hung around the dome
Careful he treasured in a private room;
Then to her suitors bade his queen propose
The archer's strife, the source of future woes,
And omen of our death! In vain we drew
The twanging string, and tried the stubborn yew:
To none it yields but great Ulysses' hands;
In vain we threat; Telemachus commands:
The bow he snatch'd, and in an instant bent;
Through every ring the victor arrow went.
Fierce on the threshold then in arms he stood;
Poured forth the darts that thirsted for our blood,
And frown'd before us, dreadful as a god!
First bleeds Antinous: thick the shafts resound,
And heaps on heaps the wretches strew the ground;
This way, and that, we turn, we fly, we fall;
Some god assisted, and unmann'd us all;
Ignoble cries precede the dying groans;
And battered brains and blood besmear the stones.

"Thus, great Atrides, thus Ulysses drove
The shades thou seest from yon fair realms above;
Our mangled bodies now deformed with gore,
Cold and neglected, spread the marble floor.
No friend to bathe our wounds, or tears to shed
O'er the pale corse! the honours of the dead."

"Oh bless'd Ulysses! (thus the king express'd
His sudden rapture) in thy consort bless'd!
Not more thy wisdom than her virtue shined;
Not more thy patience than her constant mind.
Icarius' daughter, glory of the past,
And model to the future age, shall last:
The gods, to honour her fair fame, shall rise
(Their great reward) a poet in her praise.
Not such, O Tyndarus! thy daughter's deed,
By whose dire hand her king and husband bled;
Her shall the Muse to infamy prolong,
Example dread, and theme of tragic song!
The general sex shall suffer in her shame,
And e'en the best that bears a woman's name."

Thus in the regions of eternal shade
Conferr'd the mournful phantoms of the dead;
While from the town, Ulysses and his band
Pass'd to Laertes' cultivated land.
The ground himself had purchased with his pain,
And labour made the rugged soil a plain,
There stood his mansion of the rural sort,
With useful buildings round the lowly court;
Where the few servants that divide his care
Took their laborious rest, and homely fare;
And one Sicilian matron, old and sage,
With constant duty tends his drooping age.

Here now arriving, to his rustic band
And martial son, Ulysses gave command:
"Enter the house, and of the bristly swine
Select the largest to the powers divine.
Alone, and unattended, let me try
If yet I share the old man's memory:
If those dim eyes can yet Ulysses know
(Their light and dearest object long ago),
Now changed with time, with absence and with woe."
Then to his train he gives his spear and shield;
The house they enter; and he seeks the field,
Through rows of shade, with various fruitage crown'd,
And labour'd scenes of richest verdure round.
Nor aged Dolius; nor his sons, were there,
Nor servants, absent on another care;
To search the woods for sets of flowery thorn,
Their orchard bounds to strengthen and adorn.

But all alone the hoary king he found;
His habit course, but warmly wrapp'd around;
His head, that bow'd with many a pensive care,
Fenced with a double cap of goatskin hair:
His buskins old, in former service torn,
But swell repair'd; and gloves against the thorn.
In this array the kingly gardener stood,
And clear'd a plant, encumber'd with its wood.

Beneath a neighbouring tree, the chief divine
Gazed o'er his sire, retracing every line,
The ruins of himself, now worn away
With age, yet still majestic in decay!
Sudden his eyes released their watery store;
The much-enduring man could bear no more.
Doubtful he stood, if instant to embrace
His aged limbs, to kiss his reverend face,
With eager transport to disclose the whole,
And pour at once the torrent of his soul.--
Not so: his judgment takes the winding way
Of question distant, and of soft essay;
More gentle methods on weak age employs:
And moves the sorrows to enhance the joys.
Then, to his sire with beating heart he moves,
And with a tender pleasantry reproves;
Who digging round the plant still hangs his bead,
Nor aught remits the work, while thus he said:

"Great is thy skill, O father! great thy toil,
Thy careful hand is stamp'd on all the soil,
Thy squadron'd vineyards well thy art declare,
The olive green, blue fig, and pendent pear;
And not one empty spot escapes thy care.
On every plant and tree thy cares are shown,
Nothing neglected, but thyself alone.
Forgive me, father, if this fault I blame;
Age so advanced, may some indulgence claim.
Not for thy sloth, I deem thy lord unkind:
Nor speaks thy form a mean or servile mind;
I read a monarch in that princely air,
The same thy aspect, if the same thy care;
Soft sleep, fair garments, and the joys of wine,
These are the rights of age, and should be thine.
Who then thy master, say? and whose the land
So dress'd and managed by thy skilful hand?
But chief, oh tell me! (what I question most)
Is this the far-famed Ithacensian coast?
For so reported the first man I view'd
(Some surly islander, of manners rude),
Nor farther conference vouchsafed to stay;
Heedless he whistled, and pursued his way.
But thou whom years have taught to understand,
Humanely hear, and answer my demand:
A friend I seek, a wise one and a brave:
Say, lives he yet, or moulders in the grave?
Time was (my fortunes then were at the best)
When at my house I lodged this foreign guest;
He said, from Ithaca's fair isle he came,
And old Laertes was his father's name.
To him, whatever to a guest is owed
I paid, and hospitable gifts bestow'd:
To him seven talents of pure ore I told,
Twelve cloaks, twelve vests, twelve tunics stiff with gold:
A bowl, that rich with polish'd silver flames,
And skill'd in female works, four lovely dames."

At this the father, with a father's fears
(His venerable eyes bedimm'd with tears):
"This is the land; but ah! thy gifts are lost,
For godless men, and rude possess the coast:
Sunk is the glory of this once-famed shore!
Thy ancient friend, O stranger, is no more!
Full recompense thy bounty else had borne:
For every good man yields a just return:
So civil rights demand; and who begins
The track of friendship, not pursuing, sins.
But tell me, stranger, be the truth confess'd,
What years have circled since thou saw'st that guest?
That hapless guest, alas! for ever gone!
Wretch that he was! and that I am! my son!
If ever man to misery was born,
'Twas his to suffer, and 'tis mine to mourn!
Far from his friends, and from his native reign,
He lies a prey to monsters of the main;
Or savage beasts his mangled relics tear,
Or screaming vultures scatter through the air:
Nor could his mother funeral unguents shed;
Nor wail'd his father o'er the untimely dead:
Nor his sad consort, on the mournful bier,
Seal'd his cold eyes, or dropp'd a tender tear!

"But, tell me who thou art? and what thy race?
Thy town, thy parents, and thy native place?
Or, if a merchant in pursuit of gain,
What port received thy vessel from the main?
Or comest thou single, or attend thy train?"

Then thus the son: "From Alybas I came,
My palace there; Eperitus my name
Not vulgar born: from Aphidas, the king
Of Polyphemon's royal line, I spring.
Some adverse demon from Sicania bore
Our wandering course, and drove us on your shore;
Far from the town, an unfrequented bay
Relieved our wearied vessel from the sea.
Five years have circled since these eyes pursued
Ulysses parting through the sable flood:
Prosperous he sail'd, with dexter auguries,
And all the wing'd good omens of the skies.
Well hoped we then to meet on this fair shore,
Whom Heaven, alas! decreed to meet no more."

Quick through the father's heart these accents ran;
Grief seized at once, and wrapp'd up all the man:
Deep from his soul lie sigh'd, and sorrowing spread
A cloud of ashes on his hoary head.
Trembling with agonies of strong delight
Stood the great son, heart-wounded with the sight:
He ran, he seized him with a strict embrace,
With thousand kisses wander'd o'er his face:
"I, I am he; O father, rise! behold
Thy son, with twenty winters now grown old;
Thy son, so long desired, so long detain'd,
Restored, and breathing in his native land:
These floods of sorrow, O my sire, restrain!
The vengeance is complete; the suitor train,
Stretch'd in our palace, by these hands lie slain."

Amazed, Laertes: "Give some certain sign
(If such thou art) to manifest thee mine."

"Lo here the wound (he cries) received of yore,
The scar indented by the tusky boar,
When, by thyself, and by Anticlea sent,
To old Autolycus' realms I went.
Yet by another sign thy offspring know;
The several trees you gave me long ago,
While yet a child, these fields I loved to trace,
And trod thy footsteps with unequal pace;
To every plant in order as we came,
Well-pleased, you told its nature and its name,
Whate'er my childish fancy ask'd, bestow'd:
Twelve pear-trees, bowing with their pendent load,
And ten, that red with blushing apples glow'd;
Full fifty purple figs; and many a row
Of various vines that then began to blow,
A future vintage! when the Hours produce
Their latent buds, and Sol exalts the juice."

Smit with the signs which all his doubts explain,
His heart within him melt; his knees sustain
Their feeble weight no more: his arms alone
Support him, round the loved Ulysses thrown;
He faints, he sinks, with mighty joys oppress'd:
Ulysses clasps him to his eager breast.
Soon as returning life regains its seat,
And his breath lengthens, and his pulses beat:
"Yes, I believe (he cries) almighty Jove!
Heaven rules us yet, and gods there are above.
'Tis so--the suitors for their wrongs have paid--
But what shall guard us, if the town invade?
If, while the news through every city flies,
All Ithaca and Cephalenia rise?"
To this Ulysses: "As the gods shall please
Be all the rest: and set thy soul at ease.
Haste to the cottage by this orchard's side,
And take the banquet which our cares provide;
There wait thy faithful band of rural friends,
And there the young Telemachus attends."

Thus, having said, they traced the garden o'er
And stooping entered at the lowly door.
The swains and young Telemachus they found.
The victim portion'd and the goblet crown'd.
The hoary king, his old Sicilian maid
Perfum'd and wash'd, and gorgeously arrayed.
Pallas attending gives his frame to shine
With awful port, and majesty divine;
His gazing son admires the godlike grace,
And air celestial dawning o'er his face.
"What god (he cried) my father's form improves!
How high he treads and how enlarged he moves!"

"Oh! would to all the deathless powers on high,
Pallas and Jove, and him who gilds the sky!
(Replied the king elated with his praise)
My strength were still, as once in better days:
When the bold Cephalens the leaguer form'd.
And proud Nericus trembled as I storm'd.
Such were I now, not absent from your deed
When the last sun beheld the suitors bleed,
This arm had aided yours, this hand bestrown
Our shores with death, and push'd the slaughter on;
Nor had the sire been separate from the son."

They communed thus; while homeward bent their way
The swains, fatigued with labours of the day:
Dolius, the first, the venerable man;
And next his sons, a long succeeding train.
For due refection to the bower they came,
Call'd by the careful old Sicilian dame,
Who nursed the children, and now tends the sire,
They see their lord, they gaze, and they admire.
On chairs and beds in order seated round,
They share the gladsome board; the roofs resound,
While thus Ulysses to his ancient friend:
"Forbear your wonder, and the feast attend:
The rites have waited long." The chief commands
Their love in vain; old Dolius spreads his hands,
Springs to his master with a warm embrace,
And fastens kisses on his hands and face;
Then thus broke out: "O long, O daily mourn'd!
Beyond our hopes, and to our wish return'd!
Conducted sure by Heaven! for Heaven alone
Could work this wonder: welcome to thy own!
And joys and happiness attend thy throne!
Who knows thy bless'd, thy wish'd return? oh say,
To the chaste queen shall we the news convey?
Or hears she, and with blessings loads the day?"

"Dismiss that care, for to the royal bride
Already is it known" (the king replied,
And straight resumed his seat); while round him bows
Each faithful youth, and breathes out ardent vows:
Then all beneath their father take their place,
Rank'd by their ages, and the banquet grace.

Now flying Fame the swift report had spread
Through all the city, of the suitors dead,
In throngs they rise, and to the palace crowd;
Their sighs were many and the tumult loud.
Weeping they bear the mangled heaps of slain;
Inhume the natives in their native plain,
The rest in ships are wafted o'er the main.
Then sad in council all the seniors sate,
Frequent and full, assembled to debate:
Amid the circle first Eupithes rose,
Big was his eye with tears, his heart with woes:
The bold Antinous was his age's pride,
The first who by Ulysses' arrow died.
Down his wan cheek the trickling torrent ran,
As mixing words with sighs he thus began:

"Great deeds, O friends! this wondrous man has wrought,
And mighty blessings to his country brought!
With ships he parted, and a numerous train,
Those, and their ships, he buried in the main.
Now he returns, and first essays his hand
In the best blood of all his native land.
Haste, then, and ere to neighbouring Pyle he flies,
Or sacred Elis, to procure supplies;
Arise (or ye for ever fall), arise!
Shame to this age, and all that shall succeed!
If unrevenged your sons and brothers bleed.
Prove that we live, by vengeance on his head,
Or sink at once forgotten with the dead."
Here ceased he, but indignant tears let fall
Spoke when he ceased: dumb sorrow touch'd them all.
When from the palace to the wondering throng
Sage Medon came, and Phemius came along
(Restless and early sleep's soft bands they broke);
And Medon first the assembled chiefs bespoke;

"Hear me, ye peers and elders of the land,
Who deem this act the work of mortal hand;
As o'er the heaps of death Ulysses strode,
These eyes, these eyes beheld a present god,
Who now before him, now beside him stood,
Fought as he fought, and mark'd his way with blood:
In vain old Mentor's form the god belied;
'Twas Heaven that struck, and Heaven was on his side."

A sudden horror all the assembly shook,
When slowly rising, Halitherses spoke
(Reverend and wise, whose comprehensive view
At once the present and the future knew):
"Me too, ye fathers, hear! from you proceed
The ills ye mourn; your own the guilty deed.
Ye gave your sons, your lawless sons, the rein
(Oft warn'd by Mentor and myself in vain);
An absent hero's bed they sought to soil,
An absent hero's wealth they made their spoil;
Immoderate riot, and intemperate lust!
The offence was great, the punishment was just.
Weigh then my counsels in an equal scale,
Nor rush to ruin. Justice will prevail."

His moderate words some better minds persuade:
They part, and join him: but the number stay'd.
They storm, they shout, with hasty frenzy fired,
And second all Eupithes' rage inspired.
They case their limbs in brass; to arms they run;
The broad effulgence blazes in the sun.
Before the city, and in ample plain,
They meet: Eupithes heads the frantic train.
Fierce for his son, he breathes his threats in air;
Fate bears them not, and Death attends him there.

This pass'd on earth, while in the realms above
Minerva thus to cloud-compelling Jove!
"May I presume to search thy secret soul?
O Power Supreme, O Ruler of the whole!
Say, hast thou doom'd to this divided state
Or peaceful amity or stern debate?
Declare thy purpose, for thy will is fate."

"Is not thy thought my own? (the god replies
Who rolls the thunder o'er the vaulted skies;)
Hath not long since thy knowing soul decreed
The chief's return should make the guilty bleed.
'Tis done, and at thy will the Fates succeed.
Yet hear the issue: Since Ulysses' hand
Has slain the suitors, Heaven shall bless the land.
None now the kindred of the unjust shall own;
Forgot the slaughter'd brother and the son:
Each future day increase of wealth shall bring,
And o'er the past Oblivion stretch her wing.
Long shall Ulysses in his empire rest,
His people blessing, by his people bless'd.
Let all be peace."--He said, and gave the nod
That binds the Fates; the sanction of the god
And prompt to execute the eternal will,
Descended Pallas from the Olympian hill.

Now sat Ulysses at the rural feast
The rage of hunger and of thirst repress'd:
To watch the foe a trusty spy he sent:
A son of Dolius on the message went,
Stood in the way, and at a glance beheld
The foe approach, embattled on the field.
With backward step he hastens to the bower,
And tells the news. They arm with all their power.
Four friends alone Ulysses' cause embrace,
And six were all the sons of Dolius' race:
Old Dolius too his rusted arms put on;
And, still more old, in arms Laertes shone.
Trembling with warmth, the hoary heroes stand,
And brazen panoply invests the band.
The opening gates at once their war display:
Fierce they rush forth: Ulysses leads the way.
That moment joins them with celestial aid,
In Mentor's form, the Jove-descended maid:
The suffering hero felt his patient breast
Swell with new joy, and thus his son address'd:

"Behold, Telemachus! (nor fear the sight,)
The brave embattled, the grim front of fight!
The valiant with the valiant must contend.
Shame not the line whence glorious you descend.
Wide o'er the world their martial fame was spread;
Regard thyself, the living and the dead."

"Thy eyes, great father! on this battle cast,
Shall learn from me Penelope was chaste."

So spoke Telemachus: the gallant boy
Good old Laertes heard with panting joy.
"And bless'd! thrice bless'd this happy day! (he cries,)
The day that shows me, ere I close my eyes,
A son and grandson of the Arcesian name
Strive for fair virtue, and contest for fame!"

Then thus Minerva in Laertes' ear:
"Son of Arcesius, reverend warrior, hear!
Jove and Jove's daughter first implore in prayer,
Then, whirling high, discharge thy lance in air."
She said, infusing courage with the word.
Jove and Jove's daughter then the chief implored,
And, whirling high, dismiss'd the lance in air.
Full at Eupithes drove the deathful spear:
The brass-cheek'd helmet opens to the wound;
He falls, earth thunders, and his arms resound.
Before the father and the conquering son
Heaps rush on heaps, they fight, they drop, they run
Now by the sword, and now the javelin, fall
The rebel race, and death had swallow'd all;
But from on high the blue-eyed virgin cried;
Her awful voice detain'd the headlong tide:
"Forbear, ye nations, your mad hands forbear
From mutual slaughter; Peace descends to spare."
Fear shook the nations: at the voice divine
They drop their javelins, and their rage resign.
All scatter'd round their glittering weapons lie;
Some fall to earth, and some confusedly fly.
With dreadful shouts Ulysses pour'd along,
Swift as an eagle, as an eagle strong.
But Jove's red arm the burning thunder aims:
Before Minerva shot the livid flames;
Blazing they fell, and at her feet expired;
Then stopped the goddess, trembled and retired.

"Descended from the gods! Ulysses, cease;
Offend not Jove: obey, and give the peace."

So Pallas spoke: the mandate from above
The king obey'd. The virgin-seed of Jove,
In Mentor's form, confirm'd the full accord,
And willing nations knew their lawful lord.

**
An Essay on Man
***

Awake, my St. John! leave all meaner things
To low ambition, and the pride of kings.
Let us (since life can little more supply
Than just to look about us and to die)
Expatiate free o'er all this scene of man;
A mighty maze! but not without a plan;
A wild, where weeds and flowers promiscuous shoot;
Or garden tempting with forbidden fruit.
Together let us beat this ample field,
Try what the open, what the covert yield;
The latent tracts, the giddy heights, explore
Of all who blindly creep, or sightless soar;
Eye Nature's walks, shoot Folly as it flies,
And catch the manners living as they rise;
Laugh where we must, be candid where we can;
But vindicate the ways of God to man.

Say first, of God above, or man below
What can we reason, but from what we know?
Of man, what see we but his station here,
From which to reason, or to which refer?
Through worlds unnumbered though the God be known,
'Tis ours to trace Him only in our own.
He, who through vast immensity can pierce,
See worlds on worlds compose one universe,
Observe how system into system runs,
What other planets circle other suns,
What varied being peoples every star,
May tell why Heaven has made us as we are.
But of this frame, the bearings, and the ties,
The strong connections, nice dependencies,
Gradations just, has thy pervading soul
Looked through? or can a part contain the whole?
Is the great chain, that draws all to agree,
And drawn supports, upheld by God, or thee?

Presumptuous man! the reason wouldst thou find,
Why formed so weak, so little, and so blind?
First, if thou canst, the harder reason guess,
Why formed no weaker, blinder, and no less;
Ask of thy mother earth, why oaks are made
Taller or stronger than the weeds they shade?
Or ask of yonder argent fields above,
Why Jove's satellites are less than Jove?
Of systems possible, if 'tis confest
That wisdom infinite must form the best,
Where all must full or not coherent be,
And all that rises, rise in due degree;
Then in the scale of reasoning life, 'tis plain,
There must be, somewhere, such a rank as man:
And all the question (wrangle e'er so long)
Is only this, if God has placed him wrong?
Respecting man, whatever wrong we call,
May, must be right, as relative to all.
In human works, though laboured on with pain,
A thousand movements scarce one purpose gain;
In God's one single can its end produce;
Yet serves to second too some other use.
So man, who here seems principal alone,
Perhaps acts second to some sphere unknown,
Touches some wheel, or verges to some goal;
'Tis but a part we see, and not a whole.
When the proud steed shall know why man restrains
His fiery course, or drives him o'er the plains:
When the dull ox, why now he breaks the clod,
Is now a victim, and now Egypt's god:
Then shall man's pride and dulness comprehend
His actions', passions', being's, use and end;
Why doing, suffering, checked, impelled; and why
This hour a slave, the next a deity.
Then say not man's imperfect, Heaven in fault;
Say rather man's as perfect as he ought:
His knowledge measured to his state and place;
His time a moment, and a point his space.
If to be perfect in a certain sphere,
What matter, soon or late, or here or there?
The blest to-day is as completely so,
As who began a thousand years ago.

Heaven from all creatures hides the book of Fate,
All but the page prescribed, their present state:
From brutes what men, from men what spirits know:
Or who could suffer being here below?
The lamb thy riot dooms to bleed to-day,
Had he thy reason, would he skip and play?
Pleased to the last, he crops the flowery food,
And licks the hand just raised to shed his blood.
Oh, blindness to the future! kindly given,
That each may fill the circle, marked by Heaven:
Who sees with equal eye, as God of all,
A hero perish, or a sparrow fall,
Atoms or systems into ruin hurled,
And now a bubble burst, and now a world.
Hope humbly, then; with trembling pinions soar;
Wait the great teacher Death; and God adore.
What future bliss, He gives not thee to know,
But gives that hope to be thy blessing now.
Hope springs eternal in the human breast:
Man never is, but always to be blest:
The soul, uneasy and confined from home,
Rests and expatiates in a life to come.
Lo, the poor Indian! whose untutored mind
Sees God in clouds, or hears Him in the wind;
His soul, proud science never taught to stray
Far as the solar walk, or milky way;
Yet simple Nature to his hope has given,
Behind the cloud-topped hill, an humbler heaven;
Some safer world in depth of woods embraced,
Some happier island in the watery waste,
Where slaves once more their native land behold,
No fiends torment, no Christians thirst for gold.
To be, contents his natural desire,
He asks no angel's wing, no seraph's fire;
But thinks, admitted to that equal sky,
His faithful dog shall bear him company.

Go, wiser thou! and, in thy scale of sense,
Weigh thy opinion against providence;
Call imperfection what thou fanciest such,
Say, here He gives too little, there too much;
Destroy all creatures for thy sport or gust,
Yet cry, if man's unhappy, God's unjust;
If man alone engross not Heaven's high care,
Alone made perfect here, immortal there:
Snatch from His hand the balance and the rod,
Re-judge His justice, be the God of God.
In pride, in reasoning pride, our error lies;
All quit their sphere, and rush into the skies.
Pride still is aiming at the blest abodes,
Men would be angels, angels would be gods.
Aspiring to be gods, if angels fell,
Aspiring to be angels, men rebel:
And who but wishes to invert the laws
Of order, sins against the Eternal Cause.

Ask for what end the heavenly bodies shine,
Earth for whose use?  Pride answers, "'Tis for mine:
For me kind Nature wakes her genial power,
Suckles each herb, and spreads out every flower;
Annual for me, the grape, the rose renew
The juice nectareous, and the balmy dew;
For me, the mine a thousand treasures brings;
For me, health gushes from a thousand springs;
Seas roll to waft me, suns to light me rise;
My footstool earth, my canopy the skies."
But errs not Nature from this gracious end,
From burning suns when livid deaths descend,
When earthquakes swallow, or when tempests sweep
Towns to one grave, whole nations to the deep?
"No, ('tis replied) the first Almighty Cause
Acts not by partial, but by general laws;
The exceptions few; some change since all began;
And what created perfect?"--Why then man?
If the great end be human happiness,
Then Nature deviates; and can man do less?
As much that end a constant course requires
Of showers and sunshine, as of man's desires;
As much eternal springs and cloudless skies,
As men for ever temperate, calm, and wise.
If plagues or earthquakes break not Heaven's design,
Why then a Borgia, or a Catiline?
Who knows but He, whose hand the lightning forms,
Who heaves old ocean, and who wings the storms;
Pours fierce ambition in a Caesar's mind,
Or turns young Ammon loose to scourge mankind?
From pride, from pride, our very reasoning springs;
Account for moral, as for natural things:
Why charge we heaven in those, in these acquit?
In both, to reason right is to submit.
Better for us, perhaps, it might appear,
Were there all harmony, all virtue here;
That never air or ocean felt the wind;
That never passion discomposed the mind.
But all subsists by elemental strife;
And passions are the elements of life.
The general order, since the whole began,
Is kept in nature, and is kept in man.

What would this man?  Now upward will he soar,
And little less than angel, would be more;
Now looking downwards, just as grieved appears
To want the strength of bulls, the fur of bears
Made for his use all creatures if he call,
Say what their use, had he the powers of all?
Nature to these, without profusion, kind,
The proper organs, proper powers assigned;
Each seeming want compensated of course,
Here with degrees of swiftness, there of force;
All in exact proportion to the state;
Nothing to add, and nothing to abate.
Each beast, each insect, happy in its own:
Is Heaven unkind to man, and man alone?
Shall he alone, whom rational we call,
Be pleased with nothing, if not blessed with all?
The bliss of man (could pride that blessing find)
Is not to act or think beyond mankind;
No powers of body or of soul to share,
But what his nature and his state can bear.
Why has not man a microscopic eye?
For this plain reason, man is not a fly.
Say what the use, were finer optics given,
To inspect a mite, not comprehend the heaven?
Or touch, if tremblingly alive all o'er,
To smart and agonize at every pore?
Or quick effluvia darting through the brain,
Die of a rose in aromatic pain?
If Nature thundered in his opening ears,
And stunned him with the music of the spheres,
How would he wish that Heaven had left him still
The whispering zephyr, and the purling rill?
Who finds not Providence all good and wise,
Alike in what it gives, and what denies?

Far as Creation's ample range extends,
The scale of sensual, mental powers ascends:
Mark how it mounts, to man's imperial race,
From the green myriads in the peopled grass:
What modes of sight betwixt each wide extreme,
The mole's dim curtain, and the lynx's beam:
Of smell, the headlong lioness between,
And hound sagacious on the tainted green:
Of hearing, from the life that fills the flood,
To that which warbles through the vernal wood:
The spider's touch, how exquisitely fine!
Feels at each thread, and lives along the line:
In the nice bee, what sense so subtly true
From poisonous herbs extracts the healing dew?
How instinct varies in the grovelling swine,
Compared, half-reasoning elephant, with thine!
'Twixt that, and reason, what a nice barrier,
For ever separate, yet for ever near!
Remembrance and reflection how allayed;
What thin partitions sense from thought divide:
And middle natures, how they long to join,
Yet never passed the insuperable line!
Without this just gradation, could they be
Subjected, these to those, or all to thee?
The powers of all subdued by thee alone,
Is not thy reason all these powers in one?

See, through this air, this ocean, and this earth,
All matter quick, and bursting into birth.
Above, how high, progressive life may go!
Around, how wide! how deep extend below?
Vast chain of being! which from God began,
Natures ethereal, human, angel, man,
Beast, bird, fish, insect, what no eye can see,
No glass can reach; from Infinite to thee,
From thee to nothing.  On superior powers
Were we to press, inferior might on ours:
Or in the full creation leave a void,
Where, one step broken, the great scale's destroyed:
From Nature's chain whatever link you strike,
Tenth or ten thousandth, breaks the chain alike.
And, if each system in gradation roll
Alike essential to the amazing whole,
The least confusion but in one, not all
That system only, but the whole must fall.
Let earth unbalanced from her orbit fly,
Planets and suns run lawless through the sky;
Let ruling angels from their spheres be hurled,
Being on being wrecked, and world on world;
Heaven's whole foundations to their centre nod,
And nature tremble to the throne of God.
All this dread order break--for whom? for thee?
Vile worm!--Oh, madness! pride! impiety!

What if the foot, ordained the dust to tread,
Or hand, to toil, aspired to be the head?
What if the head, the eye, or ear repined
To serve mere engines to the ruling mind?
Just as absurd for any part to claim
To be another, in this general frame:
Just as absurd, to mourn the tasks or pains,
The great directing Mind of All ordains.
All are but parts of one stupendous whole,
Whose body Nature is, and God the soul;
That, changed through all, and yet in all the same;
Great in the earth, as in the ethereal frame;
Warms in the sun, refreshes in the breeze,
Glows in the stars, and blossoms in the trees,
Lives through all life, extends through all extent,
Spreads undivided, operates unspent;
Breathes in our soul, informs our mortal part,
As full, as perfect, in a hair as heart:
As full, as perfect, in vile man that mourns,
As the rapt seraph that adores and burns:
To him no high, no low, no great, no small;
He fills, he bounds, connects, and equals all.

Cease, then, nor order imperfection name:
Our proper bliss depends on what we blame.
Know thy own point: this kind, this due degree
Of blindness, weakness, Heaven bestows on thee.
Submit.  In this, or any other sphere,
Secure to be as blest as thou canst bear:
Safe in the hand of one disposing Power,
Or in the natal, or the mortal hour.
All nature is but art, unknown to thee;
All chance, direction, which thou canst not see;
All discord, harmony not understood;
All partial evil, universal good:
And, spite of pride in erring reason's spite,
One truth is clear, whatever is, is right.

Know, then, thyself, presume not God to scan;
The proper study of mankind is man.
Placed on this isthmus of a middle state,
A being darkly wise, and rudely great:
With too much knowledge for the sceptic side,
With too much weakness for the stoic's pride,
He hangs between; in doubt to act, or rest;
In doubt to deem himself a god, or beast;
In doubt his mind or body to prefer;
Born but to die, and reasoning but to err;
Alike in ignorance, his reason such,
Whether he thinks too little, or too much:
Chaos of thought and passion, all confused;
Still by himself abused, or disabused;
Created half to rise, and half to fall;
Great lord of all things, yet a prey to all;
Sole judge of truth, in endless error hurled:
The glory, jest, and riddle of the world!
Go, wondrous creature! mount where science guides,
Go, measure earth, weigh air, and state the tides;
Instruct the planets in what orbs to run,
Correct old time, and regulate the sun;
Go, soar with Plato to th' empyreal sphere,
To the first good, first perfect, and first fair;
Or tread the mazy round his followers trod,
And quitting sense call imitating God;
As Eastern priests in giddy circles run,
And turn their heads to imitate the sun.
Go, teach Eternal Wisdom how to rule--
Then drop into thyself, and be a fool!
Superior beings, when of late they saw
A mortal man unfold all Nature's law,
Admired such wisdom in an earthly shape
And showed a Newton as we show an ape.
Could he, whose rules the rapid comet bind,
Describe or fix one movement of his mind?
Who saw its fires here rise, and there descend,
Explain his own beginning, or his end?
Alas, what wonder! man's superior part
Unchecked may rise, and climb from art to art;
But when his own great work is but begun,
What reason weaves, by passion is undone.
Trace Science, then, with Modesty thy guide;
First strip off all her equipage of pride;
Deduct what is but vanity or dress,
Or learning's luxury, or idleness;
Or tricks to show the stretch of human brain,
Mere curious pleasure, or ingenious pain;
Expunge the whole, or lop th' excrescent parts
Of all our vices have created arts;
Then see how little the remaining sum,
Which served the past, and must the times to come!

Two principles in human nature reign;
Self-love to urge, and reason, to restrain;
Nor this a good, nor that a bad we call,
Each works its end, to move or govern all
And to their proper operation still,
Ascribe all good; to their improper, ill.
Self-love, the spring of motion, acts the soul;
Reason's comparing balance rules the whole.
Man, but for that, no action could attend,
And but for this, were active to no end:
Fixed like a plant on his peculiar spot,
To draw nutrition, propagate, and rot;
Or, meteor-like, flame lawless through the void,
Destroying others, by himself destroyed.
Most strength the moving principle requires;
Active its task, it prompts, impels, inspires.
Sedate and quiet the comparing lies,
Formed but to check, deliberate, and advise.
Self-love still stronger, as its objects nigh;
Reason's at distance, and in prospect lie:
That sees immediate good by present sense;
Reason, the future and the consequence.
Thicker than arguments, temptations throng.
At best more watchful this, but that more strong.
The action of the stronger to suspend,
Reason still use, to reason still attend.
Attention, habit and experience gains;
Each strengthens reason, and self-love restrains.
Let subtle schoolmen teach these friends to fight,
More studious to divide than to unite;
And grace and virtue, sense and reason split,
With all the rash dexterity of wit.
Wits, just like fools, at war about a name,
Have full as oft no meaning, or the same.
Self-love and reason to one end aspire,
Pain their aversion, pleasure their desire;
But greedy that, its object would devour,
This taste the honey, and not wound the flower:
Pleasure, or wrong or rightly understood,
Our greatest evil, or our greatest good.

Modes of self-love the passions we may call;
'Tis real good, or seeming, moves them all:
But since not every good we can divide,
And reason bids us for our own provide;
Passions, though selfish, if their means be fair,
List under Reason, and deserve her care;
Those, that imparted, court a nobler aim,
Exalt their kind, and take some virtue's name.
In lazy apathy let stoics boast
Their virtue fixed; 'tis fixed as in a frost;
Contracted all, retiring to the breast;
But strength of mind is exercise, not rest:
The rising tempest puts in act the soul,
Parts it may ravage, but preserves the whole.
On life's vast ocean diversely we sail,
Reason the card, but passion is the gale;
Nor God alone in the still calm we find,
He mounts the storm, and walks upon the wind.
Passions, like elements, though born to fight,
Yet, mixed and softened, in his work unite:
These, 'tis enough to temper and employ;
But what composes man, can man destroy?
Suffice that Reason keep to Nature's road,
Subject, compound them, follow her and God.
Love, hope, and joy, fair pleasure's smiling train,
Hate, fear, and grief, the family of pain,
These mixed with art, and to due bounds confined,
Make and maintain the balance of the mind;
The lights and shades, whose well-accorded strife
Gives all the strength and colour of our life.
Pleasures are ever in our hands or eyes;
And when in act they cease, in prospect rise:
Present to grasp, and future still to find,
The whole employ of body and of mind.
All spread their charms, but charm not all alike;
On different senses different objects strike;
Hence different passions more or less inflame,
As strong or weak, the organs of the frame;
And hence once master passion in the breast,
Like Aaron's serpent, swallows up the rest.
As man, perhaps, the moment of his breath
Receives the lurking principle of death;
The young disease that must subdue at length,
Grows with his growth, and strengthens with his strength:
So, cast and mingled with his very frame,
The mind's disease, its ruling passion came;
Each vital humour which should feed the whole,
Soon flows to this, in body and in soul:
Whatever warms the heart, or fills the head,
As the mind opens, and its functions spread,
Imagination plies her dangerous art,
And pours it all upon the peccant part.
Nature its mother, habit is its nurse;
Wit, spirit, faculties, but make it worse;
Reason itself but gives it edge and power;
As Heaven's blest beam turns vinegar more sour.
We, wretched subjects, though to lawful sway,
In this weak queen some favourite still obey:
Ah! if she lend not arms, as well as rules,
What can she more than tell us we are fools?
Teach us to mourn our nature, not to mend,
A sharp accuser, but a helpless friend!
Or from a judge turn pleader, to persuade
The choice we make, or justify it made;
Proud of an easy conquest all along,
She but removes weak passions for the strong;
So, when small humours gather to a gout,
The doctor fancies he has driven them out.
Yes, Nature's road must ever be preferred;
Reason is here no guide, but still a guard:
'Tis hers to rectify, not overthrow,
And treat this passion more as friend than foe:
A mightier power the strong direction sends,
And several men impels to several ends:
Like varying winds, by other passions tossed,
This drives them constant to a certain coast.
Let power or knowledge, gold or glory, please,
Or (oft more strong than all) the love of ease;
Through life 'tis followed, even at life's expense;
The merchant's toil, the sage's indolence,
The monk's humility, the hero's pride,
All, all alike, find reason on their side.
The eternal art, educing good from ill,
Grafts on this passion our best principle:
'Tis thus the mercury of man is fixed,
Strong grows the virtue with his nature mixed;
The dross cements what else were too refined,
And in one interest body acts with mind.
As fruits, ungrateful to the planter's care,
On savage stocks inserted, learn to bear;
The surest virtues thus from passions shoot,
Wild nature's vigour working at the root.
What crops of wit and honesty appear
From spleen, from obstinacy, hate, or fear!
See anger, zeal and fortitude supply;
Even avarice, prudence; sloth, philosophy;
Lust, through some certain strainers well refined,
Is gentle love, and charms all womankind;
Envy, to which th' ignoble mind's a slave,
Is emulation in the learned or brave;
Nor virtue, male or female, can we name,
But what will grow on pride, or grow on shame.
Thus Nature gives us (let it check our pride)
The virtue nearest to our vice allied:
Reason the bias turns to good from ill
And Nero reigns a Titus, if he will.
The fiery soul abhorred in Catiline,
In Decius charms, in Curtius is divine:
The same ambition can destroy or save,
And makes a patriot as it makes a knave.
This light and darkness in our chaos joined,
What shall divide?  The God within the mind.
Extremes in nature equal ends produce,
In man they join to some mysterious use;
Though each by turns the other's bound invade,
As, in some well-wrought picture, light and shade,
And oft so mix, the difference is too nice
Where ends the virtue or begins the vice.
Fools! who from hence into the notion fall,
That vice or virtue there is none at all.
If white and black blend, soften, and unite
A thousand ways, is there no black or white?
Ask your own heart, and nothing is so plain;
'Tis to mistake them, costs the time and pain.
Vice is a monster of so frightful mien,
As, to be hated, needs but to be seen;
Yet seen too oft, familiar with her face,
We first endure, then pity, then embrace.
But where th' extreme of vice, was ne'er agreed:
Ask where's the north? at York, 'tis on the Tweed;
In Scotland, at the Orcades; and there,
At Greenland, Zembla, or the Lord knows where.
No creature owns it in the first degree,
But thinks his neighbour farther gone than he;
Even those who dwell beneath its very zone,
Or never feel the rage, or never own;
What happier nations shrink at with affright,
The hard inhabitant contends is right.
Virtuous and vicious every man must be,
Few in th' extreme, but all in the degree,
The rogue and fool by fits is fair and wise;
And even the best, by fits, what they despise.
'Tis but by parts we follow good or ill;
For, vice or virtue, self directs it still;
Each individual seeks a several goal;
But Heaven's great view is one, and that the whole.
That counter-works each folly and caprice;
That disappoints th' effect of every vice;
That, happy frailties to all ranks applied,
Shame to the virgin, to the matron pride,
Fear to the statesman, rashness to the chief,
To kings presumption, and to crowds belief:
That, virtue's ends from vanity can raise,
Which seeks no interest, no reward but praise;
And build on wants, and on defects of mind,
The joy, the peace, the glory of mankind.
Heaven forming each on other to depend,
A master, or a servant, or a friend,
Bids each on other for assistance call,
Till one man's weakness grows the strength of all.
Wants, frailties, passions, closer still ally
The common interest, or endear the tie.
To these we owe true friendship, love sincere,
Each home-felt joy that life inherits here;
Yet from the same we learn, in its decline,
Those joys, those loves, those interests to resign;
Taught half by reason, half by mere decay,
To welcome death, and calmly pass away.
Whate'er the passion, knowledge, fame, or pelf,
Not one will change his neighbour with himself.
The learned is happy nature to explore,
The fool is happy that he knows no more;
The rich is happy in the plenty given,
The poor contents him with the care of Heaven.
See the blind beggar dance, the cripple sing,
The sot a hero, lunatic a king;
The starving chemist in his golden views
Supremely blest, the poet in his muse.
See some strange comfort every state attend,
And pride bestowed on all, a common friend;
See some fit passion every age supply,
Hope travels through, nor quits us when we die.
Behold the child, by Nature's kindly law,
Pleased with a rattle, tickled with a straw:
Some livelier plaything gives his youth delight,
A little louder, but as empty quite:
Scarves, garters, gold, amuse his riper stage,
And beads and prayer-books are the toys of age:
Pleased with this bauble still, as that before;
Till tired he sleeps, and life's poor play is o'er.
Meanwhile opinion gilds with varying rays
Those painted clouds that beautify our days;
Each want of happiness by hope supplied,
And each vacuity of sense by pride:
These build as fast as knowledge can destroy;
In folly's cup still laughs the bubble, joy;
One prospect lost, another still we gain;
And not a vanity is given in vain;
Even mean self-love becomes, by force divine,
The scale to measure others' wants by thine.
See! and confess, one comfort still must rise,
'Tis this, though man's a fool, yet God is wise.

Here, then, we rest: "The Universal Cause
Acts to one end, but acts by various laws."
In all the madness of superfluous health,
The trim of pride, the impudence of wealth,
Let this great truth be present night and day;
But most be present, if we preach or pray.
Look round our world; behold the chain of love
Combining all below and all above.
See plastic Nature working to this end,
The single atoms each to other tend,
Attract, attracted to, the next in place
Formed and impelled its neighbour to embrace.
See matter next, with various life endued,
Press to one centre still, the general good.
See dying vegetables life sustain,
See life dissolving vegetate again:
All forms that perish other forms supply
(By turns we catch the vital breath, and die),
Like bubbles on the sea of matter borne,
They rise, they break, and to that sea return.
Nothing is foreign: parts relate to whole;
One all-extending, all-preserving soul
Connects each being, greatest with the least;
Made beast in aid of man, and man of beast;
All served, all serving: nothing stands alone;
The chain holds on, and where it ends, unknown.
Has God, thou fool! worked solely for thy Thy good,
Thy joy, thy pastime, thy attire, thy food?
Who for thy table feeds the wanton fawn,
For him as kindly spread the flowery lawn:
Is it for thee the lark ascends and sings?
Joy tunes his voice, joy elevates his wings.
Is it for thee the linnet pours his throat?
Loves of his own and raptures swell the note.
The bounding steed you pompously bestride,
Shares with his lord the pleasure and the pride.
Is thine alone the seed that strews the plain?
The birds of heaven shall vindicate their grain.
Thine the full harvest of the golden year?
Part pays, and justly, the deserving steer:
The hog, that ploughs not nor obeys thy call,
Lives on the labours of this lord of all.
Know, Nature's children all divide her care;
The fur that warms a monarch, warmed a bear.
While man exclaims, "See all things for my use!"
"See man for mine!" replies a pampered goose:
And just as short of reason he must fall,
Who thinks all made for one, not one for all.
Grant that the powerful still the weak control;
Be man the wit and tyrant of the whole:
Nature that tyrant checks; he only knows,
And helps, another creature's wants and woes.
Say, will the falcon, stooping from above,
Smit with her varying plumage, spare the dove?
Admires the jay the insect's gilded wings?
Or hears the hawk when Philomela sings?
Man cares for all: to birds he gives his woods,
To beasts his pastures, and to fish his floods;
For some his interest prompts him to provide,
For more his pleasure, yet for more his pride:
All feed on one vain patron, and enjoy
The extensive blessing of his luxury.
That very life his learned hunger craves,
He saves from famine, from the savage saves;
Nay, feasts the animal he dooms his feast,
And, till he ends the being, makes it blest;
Which sees no more the stroke, or feels the pain,
Than favoured man by touch ethereal slain.
The creature had his feast of life before;
Thou too must perish when thy feast is o'er!
To each unthinking being, Heaven, a friend,
Gives not the useless knowledge of its end:
To man imparts it; but with such a view
As, while he dreads it, makes him hope it too;
The hour concealed, and so remote the fear,
Death still draws nearer, never seeming near.
Great standing miracle! that Heaven assigned
Its only thinking thing this turn of mind.

Whether with reason, or with instinct blest,
Know, all enjoy that power which suits them best;
To bliss alike by that direction tend,
And find the means proportioned to their end.
Say, where full instinct is the unerring guide,
What pope or council can they need beside?
Reason, however able, cool at best,
Cares not for service, or but serves when pressed,
Stays till we call, and then not often near;
But honest instinct comes a volunteer,
Sure never to o'er-shoot, but just to hit;
While still too wide or short is human wit;
Sure by quick nature happiness to gain,
Which heavier reason labours at in vain,
This too serves always, reason never long;
One must go right, the other may go wrong.
See then the acting and comparing powers
One in their nature, which are two in ours;
And reason raise o'er instinct as you can,
In this 'tis God directs, in that 'tis man.
Who taught the nations of the field and wood
To shun their poison, and to choose their food?
Prescient, the tides or tempests to withstand,
Build on the wave, or arch beneath the sand?
Who made the spider parallels design,
Sure as Demoivre, without rule or line?
Who did the stork, Columbus-like, explore
Heavens not his own, and worlds unknown before?
Who calls the council, states the certain day,
Who forms the phalanx, and who points the way?

God in the nature of each being founds
Its proper bliss, and sets its proper bounds:
But as He framed a whole, the whole to bless,
On mutual wants built mutual happiness:
So from the first, eternal order ran,
And creature linked to creature, man to man.
Whate'er of life all-quickening ether keeps,
Or breathes through air, or shoots beneath the deeps,
Or pours profuse on earth, one nature feeds
The vital flame, and swells the genial seeds.
Not man alone, but all that roam the wood,
Or wing the sky, or roll along the flood,
Each loves itself, but not itself alone,
Each sex desires alike, till two are one.
Nor ends the pleasure with the fierce embrace;
They love themselves, a third time, in their race.
Thus beast and bird their common charge attend,
The mothers nurse it, and the sires defend;
The young dismissed to wander earth or air,
There stops the instinct, and there ends the care;
The link dissolves, each seeks a fresh embrace,
Another love succeeds, another race.
A longer care man's helpless kind demands;
That longer care contracts more lasting bands:
Reflection, reason, still the ties improve,
At once extend the interest and the love;
With choice we fix, with sympathy we burn;
Each virtue in each passion takes its turn;
And still new needs, new helps, new habits rise.
That graft benevolence on charities.
Still as one brood, and as another rose,
These natural love maintained, habitual those.
The last, scarce ripened into perfect man,
Saw helpless him from whom their life began:
Memory and forecast just returns engage,
That pointed back to youth, this on to age;
While pleasure, gratitude, and hope combined,
Still spread the interest, and preserved the kind.

Nor think, in Nature's state they blindly trod;
The state of nature was the reign of God:
Self-love and social at her birth began,
Union the bond of all things, and of man.
Pride then was not; nor arts, that pride to aid;
Man walked with beast, joint tenant of the shade;
The same his table, and the same his bed;
No murder clothed him, and no murder fed.
In the same temple, the resounding wood,
All vocal beings hymned their equal God:
The shrine with gore unstained, with gold undressed,
Unbribed, unbloody, stood the blameless priest:
Heaven's attribute was universal care,
And man's prerogative to rule, but spare.
Ah! how unlike the man of times to come!
Of half that live the butcher and the tomb;
Who, foe to nature, hears the general groan,
Murders their species, and betrays his own.
But just disease to luxury succeeds,
And every death its own avenger breeds;
The fury-passions from that blood began,
And turned on man a fiercer savage, man.
See him from Nature rising slow to art!
To copy instinct then was reason's part;
Thus then to man the voice of Nature spake--
"Go, from the creatures thy instructions take:
Learn from the birds what food the thickets yield;
Learn from the beasts the physic of the field;
Thy arts of building from the bee receive;
Learn of the mole to plough, the worm to weave;
Learn of the little nautilus to sail,
Spread the thin oar, and catch the driving gale.
Here too all forms of social union find,
And hence let reason, late, instruct mankind:
Here subterranean works and cities see;
There towns aerial on the waving tree.
Learn each small people's genius, policies,
The ant's republic, and the realm of bees;
How those in common all their wealth bestow,
And anarchy without confusion know;
And these for ever, though a monarch reign,
Their separate cells and properties maintain.
Mark what unvaried laws preserve each state,
Laws wise as nature, and as fixed as fate.
In vain thy reason finer webs shall draw,
Entangle justice in her net of law,
And right, too rigid, harden into wrong;
Still for the strong too weak, the weak too strong.
Yet go! and thus o'er all the creatures sway,
Thus let the wiser make the rest obey;
And, for those arts mere instinct could afford,
Be crowned as monarchs, or as gods adored."

Great Nature spoke; observant men obeyed;
Cities were built, societies were made:
Here rose one little state: another near
Grew by like means, and joined, through love or fear.
Did here the trees with ruddier burdens bend,
And there the streams in purer rills descend?
What war could ravish, commerce could bestow,
And he returned a friend, who came a foe.
Converse and love mankind might strongly draw,
When love was liberty, and Nature law.
Thus States were formed; the name of king unknown,
'Till common interest placed the sway in one.
'Twas virtue only (or in arts or arms,
Diffusing blessings, or averting harms)
The same which in a sire the sons obeyed,
A prince the father of a people made.

Till then, by Nature crowned, each patriarch sate,
King, priest, and parent of his growing state;
On him, their second providence, they hung,
Their law his eye, their oracle his tongue.
He from the wondering furrow called the food,
Taught to command the fire, control the flood,
Draw forth the monsters of the abyss profound,
Or fetch the aerial eagle to the ground.
Till drooping, sickening, dying they began
Whom they revered as God to mourn as man:
Then, looking up, from sire to sire, explored
One great first Father, and that first adored.
Or plain tradition that this all begun,
Conveyed unbroken faith from sire to son;
The worker from the work distinct was known,
And simple reason never sought but one:
Ere wit oblique had broke that steady light,
Man, like his Maker, saw that all was right;
To virtue, in the paths of pleasure, trod,
And owned a Father when he owned a God.
Love all the faith, and all the allegiance then;
For Nature knew no right divine in men,
No ill could fear in God; and understood
A sovereign being but a sovereign good.
True faith, true policy, united ran,
This was but love of God, and this of man.
Who first taught souls enslaved, and realms undone,
The enormous faith of many made for one;
That proud exception to all Nature's laws,
To invert the world, and counter-work its cause?
Force first made conquest, and that conquest, law;
Till superstition taught the tyrant awe,
Then shared the tyranny, then lent it aid,
And gods of conquerors, slaves of subjects made:
She, 'midst the lightning's blaze, and thunder's sound,
When rocked the mountains, and when groaned the ground,
She taught the weak to bend, the proud to pray,
To power unseen, and mightier far than they:
She, from the rending earth and bursting skies,
Saw gods descend, and fiends infernal rise:
Here fixed the dreadful, there the blest abodes;
Fear made her devils, and weak hope her gods;
Gods partial, changeful, passionate, unjust,
Whose attributes were rage, revenge, or lust;
Such as the souls of cowards might conceive,
And, formed like tyrants, tyrants would believe.
Zeal then, not charity, became the guide;
And hell was built on spite, and heaven on pride,
Then sacred seemed the ethereal vault no more;
Altars grew marble then, and reeked with gore;
Then first the flamen tasted living food;
Next his grim idol smeared with human blood;
With heaven's own thunders shook the world below,
And played the god an engine on his foe.
So drives self-love, through just and through unjust,
To one man's power, ambition, lucre, lust:
The same self-love, in all, becomes the cause
Of what restrains him, government and laws.
For, what one likes if others like as well,
What serves one will when many wills rebel?
How shall he keep, what, sleeping or awake,
A weaker may surprise, a stronger take?
His safety must his liberty restrain:
All join to guard what each desires to gain.
Forced into virtue thus by self-defence,
Even kings learned justice and benevolence:
Self-love forsook the path it first pursued,
And found the private in the public good.
'Twas then, the studious head or generous mind,
Follower of God, or friend of human-kind,
Poet or patriot, rose but to restore
The faith and moral Nature gave before;
Re-lumed her ancient light, not kindled new;
If not God's image, yet His shadow drew:
Taught power's due use to people and to kings,
Taught nor to slack, nor strain its tender strings,
The less, or greater, set so justly true,
That touching one must strike the other too;
Till jarring interests, of themselves create
The according music of a well-mixed state.
Such is the world's great harmony, that springs
From order, union, full consent of things:
Where small and great, where weak and mighty, made
To serve, not suffer, strengthen, not invade;
More powerful each as needful to the rest,
And, in proportion as it blesses, blest;
Draw to one point, and to one centre bring
Beast, man, or angel, servant, lord, or king.
For forms of government let fools contest;
Whate'er is best administered is best:
For modes of faith let graceless zealots fight;
His can't be wrong whose life is in the right:
In faith and hope the world will disagree,
But all mankind's concern is charity:
All must be false that thwart this one great end;
And all of God, that bless mankind or mend.
Man, like the generous vine, supported lives;
The strength he gains is from the embrace he gives.
On their own axis as the planets run,
Yet make at once their circle round the sun;
So two consistent motions act the soul;
And one regards itself, and one the whole.
Thus God and Nature linked the general frame,
And bade self-love and social be the same.

Oh, happiness, our being's end and aim!
Good, pleasure, ease, content! whate'er thy name:
That something still which prompts the eternal sigh,
For which we bear to live, or dare to die,
Which still so near us, yet beyond us lies,
O'erlooked, seen double, by the fool, and wise.
Plant of celestial seed! if dropped below,
Say, in what mortal soil thou deign'st to grow?
Fair opening to some Court's propitious shine,
Or deep with diamonds in the flaming mine?
Twined with the wreaths Parnassian laurels yield,
Or reaped in iron harvests of the field?
Where grows?--where grows it not?  If vain our toil,
We ought to blame the culture, not the soil:
Fixed to no spot is happiness sincere,
'Tis nowhere to be found, or everywhere;
'Tis never to be bought, but always free,
And fled from monarchs, St. John! dwells with thee.
Ask of the learned the way?  The learned are blind;
This bids to serve, and that to shun mankind;
Some place the bliss in action, some in ease,
Those call it pleasure, and contentment these;
Some, sunk to beasts, find pleasure end in pain;
Some, swelled to gods, confess even virtue vain;
Or indolent, to each extreme they fall,
To trust in everything, or doubt of all.
Who thus define it, say they more or less
Than this, that happiness is happiness?
Take Nature's path, and mad opinions leave;
All states can reach it, and all heads conceive;
Obvious her goods, in no extreme they dwell;
There needs but thinking right, and meaning well;
And mourn our various portions as we please,
Equal is common sense, and common ease.
Remember, man, "the Universal Cause
Acts not by partial, but by general laws;"
And makes what happiness we justly call
Subsist not in the good of one, but all.
There's not a blessing individuals find,
But some way leans and hearkens to the kind:
No bandit fierce, no tyrant mad with pride,
No caverned hermit, rests self-satisfied:
Who most to shun or hate mankind pretend,
Seek an admirer, or would fix a friend:
Abstract what others feel, what others think,
All pleasures sicken, and all glories sink:
Each has his share; and who would more obtain,
Shall find, the pleasure pays not half the pain.
Order is Heaven's first law; and this confest,
Some are, and must be, greater than the rest,
More rich, more wise; but who infers from hence
That such are happier, shocks all common sense.
Heaven to mankind impartial we confess,
If all are equal in their happiness:
But mutual wants this happiness increase;
All Nature's difference keeps all Nature's peace.
Condition, circumstance is not the thing;
Bliss is the same in subject or in king,
In who obtain defence, or who defend,
In him who is, or him who finds a friend:
Heaven breathes through every member of the whole
One common blessing, as one common soul.
But fortune's gifts if each alike possessed,
And each were equal, must not all contest?
If then to all men happiness was meant,
God in externals could not place content.
Fortune her gifts may variously dispose,
And these be happy called, unhappy those;
But Heaven's just balance equal will appear,
While those are placed in hope, and these in fear:
Nor present good or ill, the joy or curse,
But future views of better or of worse,
Oh, sons of earth! attempt ye still to rise,
By mountains piled on mountains, to the skies,
Heaven still with laughter the vain toil surveys,
And buries madmen in the heaps they raise.
Know, all the good that individuals find,
Or God and Nature meant to mere mankind,
Reason's whole pleasure, all the joys of sense,
Lie in three words, health, peace, and competence.
But health consists with temperance alone;
And peace, oh, virtue! peace is all thy own.
The good or bad the gifts of fortune gain;
But these less taste them, as they worse obtain.
Say, in pursuit of profit or delight,
Who risk the most, that take wrong means, or right;
Of vice or virtue, whether blessed or cursed,
Which meets contempt, or which compassion first?
Count all the advantage prosperous vice attains,
'Tis but what virtue flies from and disdains:
And grant the bad what happiness they would,
One they must want, which is, to pass for good.
Oh, blind to truth, and God's whole scheme below,
Who fancy bliss to vice, to virtue woe!
Who sees and follows that great scheme the best,
Best knows the blessing, and will most be blest.
But fools the good alone unhappy call,
For ills or accidents that chance to all.
See Falkland dies, the virtuous and the just!
See god-like Turenne prostrate on the dust!
See Sidney bleeds amid the martial strife!
Was this their virtue, or contempt of life?
Say, was it virtue, more though Heaven ne'er gave,
Lamented Digby! sunk thee to the grave?
Tell me, if virtue made the son expire,
Why, full of days and honour, lives the sire?
Why drew Marseilles' good bishop purer breath,
When Nature sickened, and each gale was death?
Or why so long (in life if long can be)
Lent Heaven a parent to the poor and me?
What makes all physical or moral ill?
There deviates Nature, and here wanders will.
God sends not ill; if rightly understood,
Or partial ill is universal good,
Or change admits, or Nature lets it fall;
Short, and but rare, till man improved it all.
We just as wisely might of Heaven complain
That righteous Abel was destroyed by Cain,
As that the virtuous son is ill at ease
When his lewd father gave the dire disease.
Think we, like some weak prince, the Eternal Cause
Prone for His favourites to reverse His laws?
Shall burning Etna, if a sage requires,
Forget to thunder, and recall her fires?
On air or sea new motions be imprest,
Oh, blameless Bethel! to relieve thy breast?
When the loose mountain trembles from on high,
Shall gravitation cease, if you go by?
Or some old temple, nodding to its fall,
For Chartres' head reserve the hanging wall?
But still this world (so fitted for the knave)
Contents us not.  A better shall we have?
A kingdom of the just then let it be:
But first consider how those just agree.
The good must merit God's peculiar care:
But who, but God, can tell us who they are?
One thinks on Calvin Heaven's own spirit fell;
Another deems him instrument of hell;
If Calvin feel Heaven's blessing, or its rod.
This cries there is, and that, there is no God.
What shocks one part will edify the rest,
Nor with one system can they all be blest.
The very best will variously incline,
And what rewards your virtue, punish mine.
Whatever is, is right.  This world, 'tis true,
Was made for Caesar--but for Titus too:
And which more blest? who chained his country, say,
Or he whose virtue sighed to lose a day?
"But sometimes virtue starves, while vice is fed."
What then?  Is the reward of virtue bread?
That, vice may merit, 'tis the price of toil;
The knave deserves it, when he tills the soil,
The knave deserves it, when he tempts the main,
Where folly fights for kings, or dives for gain.
The good man may be weak, be indolent;
Nor is his claim to plenty, but content.
But grant him riches, your demand is o'er?
"No--shall the good want health, the good want power?"
Add health, and power, and every earthly thing,
"Why bounded power? why private? why no king?"
Nay, why external for internal given?
Why is not man a god, and earth a heaven?
Who ask and reason thus, will scarce conceive
God gives enough, while He has more to give:
Immense the power, immense were the demand;
Say, at what part of nature will they stand?
What nothing earthly gives, or can destroy,
The soul's calm sunshine, and the heartfelt joy,
Is virtue's prize: A better would you fix?
Then give humility a coach and six,
Justice a conqueror's sword, or truth a gown,
Or public spirit its great cure, a crown.
Weak, foolish man! will heaven reward us there
With the same trash mad mortals wish for here?
The boy and man an individual makes,
Yet sighest thou now for apples and for cakes?
Go, like the Indian, in another life
Expect thy dog, thy bottle, and thy wife:
As well as dream such trifles are assigned,
As toys and empires, for a God-like mind.
Rewards, that either would to virtue bring
No joy, or be destructive of the thing:
How oft by these at sixty are undone
The virtues of a saint at twenty-one!
To whom can riches give repute or trust,
Content, or pleasure, but the good and just?
Judges and senates have been bought for gold,
Esteem and love were never to be sold.
Oh, fool! to think God hates the worthy mind,
The lover and the love of human kind,
Whose life is healthful, and whose conscience clear,
Because he wants a thousand pounds a year.
Honour and shame from no condition rise;
Act well your part, there all the honour lies.
Fortune in men has some small difference made,
One flaunts in rags, one flutters in brocade;
The cobbler aproned, and the parson gowned,
The friar hooded, and the monarch crowned,
"What differ more (you cry) than crown and cowl?"
I'll tell you, friend! a wise man and a fool.
You'll find, if once the monarch acts the monk,
Or, cobbler-like, the parson will be drunk,
Worth makes the man, and want of it, the fellow;
The rest is all but leather or prunella.
Stuck o'er with titles and hung round with strings,
That thou mayest be by kings, or wh***s of kings.
Boast the pure blood of an illustrious race,
In quiet flow from Lucrece to Lucrece;
But by your fathers' worth if yours you rate,
Count me those only who were good and great.
Go! if your ancient, but ignoble blood
Has crept through scoundrels ever since the flood,
Go! and pretend your family is young;
Nor own, your fathers have been fools so long.
What can ennoble sots, or slaves, or cowards?
Alas! not all the blood of all the Howards.
Look next on greatness; say where greatness lies?
"Where, but among the heroes and the wise?"
Heroes are much the same, the points agreed,
From Macedonia's madman to the Swede;
The whole strange purpose of their lives, to find
Or make, an enemy of all mankind?
Not one looks backward, onward still he goes,
Yet ne'er looks forward farther than his nose.
No less alike the politic and wise;
All sly slow things, with circumspective eyes;
Men in their loose unguarded hours they take,
Not that themselves are wise, but others weak.
But grant that those can conquer, these can cheat;
'Tis phrase absurd to call a villain great:
Who wickedly is wise, or madly brave,
Is but the more a fool, the more a knave.
Who noble ends by noble means obtains,
Or failing, smiles in exile or in chains,
Like good Aurelius let him reign, or bleed
Like Socrates, that man is great indeed.
What's fame? a fancied life in others' breath,
A thing beyond us, even before our death.
Just what you hear, you have, and what's unknown
The same (my Lord) if Tully's, or your own.
All that we feel of it begins and ends
In the small circle of our foes or friends;
To all beside as much an empty shade
An Eugene living, as a Caesar dead;
Alike or when, or where, they shone, or shine,
Or on the Rubicon, or on the Rhine.
A wit's a feather, and a chief a rod;
An honest man's the noblest work of God.
Fame but from death a villain's name can save,
As justice tears his body from the grave;
When what the oblivion better were resigned,
Is hung on high, to poison half mankind.
All fame is foreign, but of true desert;
Plays round the head, but comes not to the heart:
One self-approving hour whole years outweighs
Of stupid starers, and of loud huzzas;
And more true joy Marcellus exiled feels,
Than Caesar with a senate at his heels.
In parts superior what advantage lies?
Tell (for you can) what is it to be wise?
'Tis but to know how little can be known;
To see all others' faults, and feel our own;
Condemned in business or in arts to drudge,
Without a second or without a judge;
Truths would you teach or save a sinking land,
All fear, none aid you, and few understand.
Painful pre-eminence! yourself to view
Above life's weakness, and its comforts too.
Bring, then, these blessings to a strict account;
Make fair deductions; see to what they mount;
How much of other each is sure to cost;
How each for other oft is wholly lost;
How inconsistent greater goods with these;
How sometimes life is risked, and always ease;
Think, and if still the things thy envy call,
Say, would'st thou be the man to whom they fall?
To sigh for ribands if thou art so silly,
Mark how they grace Lord Umbra, or Sir Billy:
Is yellow dirt the passion of thy life?
Look but on Gripus, or on Gripus' wife;
If parts allure thee, think how Bacon shined,
The wisest, brightest, meanest of mankind:
Or ravished with the whistling of a name,
See Cromwell; damned to everlasting fame!
If all, united, thy ambition call,
From ancient story learn to scorn them all.
There, in the rich, the honoured, famed, and great,
See the false scale of happiness complete!
In hearts of kings, or arms of queens who lay,
How happy! those to ruin, these betray.
Mark by what wretched steps their glory grows,
From dirt and seaweed as proud Venice rose;
In each how guilt and greatness equal ran,
And all that raised the hero, sunk the man:
Now Europe's laurels on their brows behold,
But stained with blood, or ill exchanged for gold;
Then see them broke with toils or sunk with ease,
Or infamous for plundered provinces.
Oh, wealth ill-fated! which no act of fame
E'er taught to shine, or sanctified from shame;
What greater bliss attends their close of life?
Some greedy minion, or imperious wife.
The trophied arches, storeyed halls invade
And haunt their slumbers in the pompous shade.
Alas! not dazzled with their noontide ray,
Compute the morn and evening to the day;
The whole amount of that enormous fame,
A tale, that blends their glory with their shame;
Know, then, this truth (enough for man to know)
"Virtue alone is happiness below."
The only point where human bliss stands still,
And tastes the good without the fall to ill;
Where only merit constant pay receives,
Is blest in what it takes, and what it gives;
The joy unequalled, if its end it gain,
And if it lose, attended with no pain;
Without satiety, though e'er so blessed,
And but more relished as the more distressed:
The broadest mirth unfeeling folly wears,
Less pleasing far than virtue's very tears:
Good, from each object, from each place acquired
For ever exercised, yet never tired;
Never elated, while one man's oppressed;
Never dejected while another's blessed;
And where no wants, no wishes can remain,
Since but to wish more virtue, is to gain.
See the sole bliss Heaven could on all bestow!
Which who but feels can taste, but thinks can know:
Yet poor with fortune, and with learning blind,
The bad must miss; the good, untaught, will find;
Slave to no sect, who takes no private road,
But looks through Nature up to Nature's God;
Pursues that chain which links the immense design,
Joins heaven and earth, and mortal and divine;
Sees, that no being any bliss can know,
But touches some above, and some below;
Learns, from this union of the rising whole,
The first, last purpose of the human soul;
And knows, where faith, law, morals, all began,
All end, in love of God, and love of man.
For Him alone, hope leads from goal to goal,
And opens still, and opens on his soul!
Till lengthened on to faith, and unconfined,
It pours the bliss that fills up all the mind
He sees, why Nature plants in man alone
Hope of known bliss, and faith in bliss unknown:
(Nature, whose dictates to no other kind
Are given in vain, but what they seek they find)
Wise is her present; she connects in this
His greatest virtue with his greatest bliss;
At once his own bright prospect to be blest,
And strongest motive to assist the rest.
Self-love thus pushed to social, to divine,
Gives thee to make thy neighbour's blessing thine.
Is this too little for the boundless heart?
Extend it, let thy enemies have part:
Grasp the whole worlds of reason, life, and sense,
In one close system of benevolence:
Happier as kinder, in whate'er degree,
And height of bliss but height of charity.
God loves from whole to parts: but human soul
Must rise from individual to the whole.
Self-love but serves the virtuous mind to wake,
As the small pebble stirs the peaceful lake!
The centre moved, a circle straight succeeds,
Another still, and still another spreads;
Friend, parent, neighbour, first it will embrace;
His country next; and next all human race;
Wide and more wide, the o'erflowings of the mind
Take every creature in, of every kind;
Earth smiles around, with boundless bounty blest,
And Heaven beholds its image in his breast.
Come, then, my friend! my genius! come along;
Oh, master of the poet, and the song!
And while the muse now stoops, or now ascends,
To man's low passions, or their glorious ends,
Teach me, like thee, in various nature wise,
To fall with dignity, with temper rise;
Formed by thy converse, happily to steer
From grave to gay, from lively to severe;
Correct with spirit, eloquent with ease,
Intent to reason, or polite to please.
Oh! while along the stream of time thy name
Expanded flies, and gathers all its fame,
Say, shall my little bark attendant sail,
Pursue the triumph, and partake the gale?
When statesmen, heroes, kings, in dust repose,
Whose sons shall blush their fathers were thy foes,
Shall then this verse to future age pretend
Thou wert my guide, philosopher, and friend?
That urged by thee, I turned the tuneful art
From sounds to things, from fancy to the heart;
From wit's false mirror held up Nature's light;
Showed erring pride, whatever is, is right;
That reason, passion, answer one great aim;
That true self-love and social are the same;
That virtue only makes our bliss below;
And all our knowledge is, ourselves to know.

**
Iliad
***

Achilles' wrath, to Greece the direful spring
Of woes unnumber'd, heavenly goddess, sing!
That wrath which hurl'd to Pluto's gloomy reign
The souls of mighty chiefs untimely slain;
Whose limbs unburied on the naked shore,
Devouring dogs and hungry vultures tore.
Since great Achilles and Atrides strove,
Such was the sovereign doom, and such the will of Jove!

Declare, O Muse! in what ill-fated hour
Sprung the fierce strife, from what offended power
Latona's son a dire contagion spread,
And heap'd the camp with mountains of the dead;
The king of men his reverent priest defied,
And for the king's offence the people died.

For Chryses sought with costly gifts to gain
His captive daughter from the victor's chain.
Suppliant the venerable father stands;
Apollo's awful ensigns grace his hands
By these he begs; and lowly bending down,
Extends the sceptre and the laurel crown
He sued to all, but chief implored for grace
The brother-kings, of Atreus' royal race

"Ye kings and warriors! may your vows be crown'd,
And Troy's proud walls lie level with the ground.
May Jove restore you when your toils are o'er
Safe to the pleasures of your native shore.
But, oh! relieve a wretched parent's pain,
And give Chryseis to these arms again;
If mercy fail, yet let my presents move,
And dread avenging Phoebus, son of Jove."

The Greeks in shouts their joint assent declare,
The priest to reverence, and release the fair.
Not so Atrides; he, with kingly pride,
Repulsed the sacred sire, and thus replied:

"Hence on thy life, and fly these hostile plains,
Nor ask, presumptuous, what the king detains
Hence, with thy laurel crown, and golden rod,
Nor trust too far those ensigns of thy god.
Mine is thy daughter, priest, and shall remain;
And prayers, and tears, and bribes, shall plead in vain;
Till time shall rifle every youthful grace,
And age dismiss her from my cold embrace,
In daily labours of the loom employ'd,
Or doom'd to deck the bed she once enjoy'd
Hence then; to Argos shall the maid retire,
Far from her native soil and weeping sire."

The trembling priest along the shore return'd,
And in the anguish of a father mourn'd.
Disconsolate, not daring to complain,
Silent he wander'd by the sounding main;
Till, safe at distance, to his god he prays,
The god who darts around the world his rays.

"O Smintheus! sprung from fair Latona's line,
Thou guardian power of Cilla the divine,
Thou source of light! whom Tenedos adores,
And whose bright presence gilds thy Chrysa's shores.
If e'er with wreaths I hung thy sacred fane,
Or fed the flames with fat of oxen slain;
God of the silver bow! thy shafts employ,
Avenge thy servant, and the Greeks destroy."

Thus Chryses pray'd.--the favouring power attends,
And from Olympus' lofty tops descends.
Bent was his bow, the Grecian hearts to wound;
Fierce as he moved, his silver shafts resound.
Breathing revenge, a sudden night he spread,
And gloomy darkness roll'd about his head.
The fleet in view, he twang'd his deadly bow,
And hissing fly the feather'd fates below.
On mules and dogs the infection first began;
And last, the vengeful arrows fix'd in man.
For nine long nights, through all the dusky air,
The pyres, thick-flaming, shot a dismal glare.
But ere the tenth revolving day was run,
Inspired by Juno, Thetis' godlike son
Convened to council all the Grecian train;
For much the goddess mourn'd her heroes slain.
The assembly seated, rising o'er the rest,
Achilles thus the king of men address'd:

"Why leave we not the fatal Trojan shore,
And measure back the seas we cross'd before?
The plague destroying whom the sword would spare,
'Tis time to save the few remains of war.
But let some prophet, or some sacred sage,
Explore the cause of great Apollo's rage;
Or learn the wasteful vengeance to remove
By mystic dreams, for dreams descend from Jove.
If broken vows this heavy curse have laid,
Let altars smoke, and hecatombs be paid.
So Heaven, atoned, shall dying Greece restore,
And Phoebus dart his burning shafts no more."

He said, and sat: when Chalcas thus replied;
Chalcas the wise, the Grecian priest and guide,
That sacred seer, whose comprehensive view,
The past, the present, and the future knew:
Uprising slow, the venerable sage
Thus spoke the prudence and the fears of age:

"Beloved of Jove, Achilles! would'st thou know
Why angry Phoebus bends his fatal bow?
First give thy faith, and plight a prince's word
Of sure protection, by thy power and sword:
For I must speak what wisdom would conceal,
And truths, invidious to the great, reveal,
Bold is the task, when subjects, grown too wise,
Instruct a monarch where his error lies;
For though we deem the short-lived fury past,
'Tis sure the mighty will revenge at last."
To whom Pelides:--"From thy inmost soul
Speak what thou know'st, and speak without control.
E'en by that god I swear who rules the day,
To whom thy hands the vows of Greece convey.
And whose bless'd oracles thy lips declare;
Long as Achilles breathes this vital air,
No daring Greek, of all the numerous band,
Against his priest shall lift an impious hand;
Not e'en the chief by whom our hosts are led,
The king of kings, shall touch that sacred head."

Encouraged thus, the blameless man replies:
"Nor vows unpaid, nor slighted sacrifice,
But he, our chief, provoked the raging pest,
Apollo's vengeance for his injured priest.
Nor will the god's awaken'd fury cease,
But plagues shall spread, and funeral fires increase,
Till the great king, without a ransom paid,
To her own Chrysa send the black-eyed maid.
Perhaps, with added sacrifice and prayer,
The priest may pardon, and the god may spare."

The prophet spoke: when with a gloomy frown
The monarch started from his shining throne;
Black choler fill'd his breast that boil'd with ire,
And from his eye-balls flash'd the living fire:
"Augur accursed! denouncing mischief still,
Prophet of plagues, for ever boding ill!
Still must that tongue some wounding message bring,
And still thy priestly pride provoke thy king?
For this are Phoebus' oracles explored,
To teach the Greeks to murmur at their lord?
For this with falsehood is my honour stain'd,
Is heaven offended, and a priest profaned;
Because my prize, my beauteous maid, I hold,
And heavenly charms prefer to proffer'd gold?
A maid, unmatch'd in manners as in face,
Skill'd in each art, and crown'd with every grace;
Not half so dear were Clytaemnestra's charms,
When first her blooming beauties bless'd my arms.
Yet, if the gods demand her, let her sail;
Our cares are only for the public weal:
Let me be deem'd the hateful cause of all,
And suffer, rather than my people fall.
The prize, the beauteous prize, I will resign,
So dearly valued, and so justly mine.
But since for common good I yield the fair,
My private loss let grateful Greece repair;
Nor unrewarded let your prince complain,
That he alone has fought and bled in vain."
"Insatiate king (Achilles thus replies),
Fond of the power, but fonder of the prize!
Would'st thou the Greeks their lawful prey should yield,
The due reward of many a well-fought field?

The spoils of cities razed and warriors slain,
We share with justice, as with toil we gain;
But to resume whate'er thy avarice craves
(That trick of tyrants) may be borne by slaves.
Yet if our chief for plunder only fight,
The spoils of Ilion shall thy loss requite,
Whene'er, by Jove's decree, our conquering powers
Shall humble to the dust her lofty towers."

Then thus the king: "Shall I my prize resign
With tame content, and thou possess'd of thine?
Great as thou art, and like a god in fight,
Think not to rob me of a soldier's right.
At thy demand shall I restore the maid?
First let the just equivalent be paid;
Such as a king might ask; and let it be
A treasure worthy her, and worthy me.
Or grant me this, or with a monarch's claim
This hand shall seize some other captive dame.
The mighty Ajax shall his prize resign;
Ulysses' spoils, or even thy own, be mine.
The man who suffers, loudly may complain;
And rage he may, but he shall rage in vain.
But this when time requires.--It now remains
We launch a bark to plough the watery plains,
And waft the sacrifice to Chrysa's shores,
With chosen pilots, and with labouring oars.
Soon shall the fair the sable ship ascend,
And some deputed prince the charge attend:
This Creta's king, or Ajax shall fulfil,
Or wise Ulysses see perform'd our will;
Or, if our royal pleasure shall ordain,
Achilles' self conduct her o'er the main;
Let fierce Achilles, dreadful in his rage,
The god propitiate, and the pest assuage."

At this, Pelides, frowning stern, replied:
"O tyrant, arm'd with insolence and pride!
Inglorious slave to interest, ever join'd
With fraud, unworthy of a royal mind!
What generous Greek, obedient to thy word,
Shall form an ambush, or shall lift the sword?
What cause have I to war at thy decree?
The distant Trojans never injured me;
To Phthia's realms no hostile troops they led:
Safe in her vales my warlike coursers fed;
Far hence removed, the hoarse-resounding main,
And walls of rocks, secure my native reign,
Whose fruitful soil luxuriant harvests grace,
Rich in her fruits, and in her martial race.
Hither we sail'd, a voluntary throng,
To avenge a private, not a public wrong:
What else to Troy the assembled nations draws,
But thine, ungrateful, and thy brother's cause?
Is this the pay our blood and toils deserve;
Disgraced and injured by the man we serve?
And darest thou threat to snatch my prize away,
Due to the deeds of many a dreadful day?
A prize as small, O tyrant! match'd with thine,
As thy own actions if compared to mine.
Thine in each conquest is the wealthy prey,
Though mine the sweat and danger of the day.
Some trivial present to my ships I bear:
Or barren praises pay the wounds of war.
But know, proud monarch, I'm thy slave no more;
My fleet shall waft me to Thessalia's shore:
Left by Achilles on the Trojan plain,
What spoils, what conquests, shall Atrides gain?"

To this the king: "Fly, mighty warrior! fly;
Thy aid we need not, and thy threats defy.
There want not chiefs in such a cause to fight,
And Jove himself shall guard a monarch's right.
Of all the kings (the god's distinguish'd care)
To power superior none such hatred bear:
Strife and debate thy restless soul employ,
And wars and horrors are thy savage joy,
If thou hast strength, 'twas Heaven that strength bestow'd;
For know, vain man! thy valour is from God.
Haste, launch thy vessels, fly with speed away;
Rule thy own realms with arbitrary sway;
I heed thee not, but prize at equal rate
Thy short-lived friendship, and thy groundless hate.
Go, threat thy earth-born Myrmidons:--but here
'Tis mine to threaten, prince, and thine to fear.
Know, if the god the beauteous dame demand,
My bark shall waft her to her native land;
But then prepare, imperious prince! prepare,
Fierce as thou art, to yield thy captive fair:
Even in thy tent I'll seize the blooming prize,
Thy loved Briseis with the radiant eyes.
Hence shalt thou prove my might, and curse the hour
Thou stood'st a rival of imperial power;
And hence, to all our hosts it shall be known,
That kings are subject to the gods alone."

Achilles heard, with grief and rage oppress'd,
His heart swell'd high, and labour'd in his breast;
Distracting thoughts by turns his bosom ruled;
Now fired by wrath, and now by reason cool'd:
That prompts his hand to draw the deadly sword,
Force through the Greeks, and pierce their haughty lord;
This whispers soft his vengeance to control,
And calm the rising tempest of his soul.
Just as in anguish of suspense he stay'd,
While half unsheathed appear'd the glittering blade,
Minerva swift descended from above,
Sent by the sister and the wife of Jove
(For both the princes claim'd her equal care);
Behind she stood, and by the golden hair
Achilles seized; to him alone confess'd;
A sable cloud conceal'd her from the rest.
He sees, and sudden to the goddess cries,
Known by the flames that sparkle from her eyes:

"Descends Minerva, in her guardian care,
A heavenly witness of the wrongs I bear
From Atreus' son?--Then let those eyes that view
The daring crime, behold the vengeance too."

"Forbear (the progeny of Jove replies)
To calm thy fury I forsake the skies:
Let great Achilles, to the gods resign'd,
To reason yield the empire o'er his mind.
By awful Juno this command is given;
The king and you are both the care of heaven.
The force of keen reproaches let him feel;
But sheathe, obedient, thy revenging steel.
For I pronounce (and trust a heavenly power)
Thy injured honour has its fated hour,
When the proud monarch shall thy arms implores
And bribe thy friendship with a boundless store.
Then let revenge no longer bear the sway;
Command thy passions, and the gods obey."

To her Pelides:--"With regardful ear,
'Tis just, O goddess! I thy dictates hear.
Hard as it is, my vengeance I suppress:
Those who revere the gods the gods will bless."
He said, observant of the blue-eyed maid;
Then in the sheath return'd the shining blade.
The goddess swift to high Olympus flies,
And joins the sacred senate of the skies.

Nor yet the rage his boiling breast forsook,
Which thus redoubling on Atrides broke:
"O monster! mix'd of insolence and fear,
Thou dog in forehead, but in heart a deer!
When wert thou known in ambush'd fights to dare,
Or nobly face the horrid front of war?
'Tis ours, the chance of fighting fields to try;
Thine to look on, and bid the valiant die:
So much 'tis safer through the camp to go,
And rob a subject, than despoil a foe.
Scourge of thy people, violent and base!
Sent in Jove's anger on a slavish race;
Who, lost to sense of generous freedom past,
Are tamed to wrongs;--or this had been thy last.
Now by this sacred sceptre hear me swear,
Which never more shall leaves or blossoms bear,
Which sever'd from the trunk (as I from thee)
On the bare mountains left its parent tree;
This sceptre, form'd by temper'd steel to prove
An ensign of the delegates of Jove,
From whom the power of laws and justice springs
(Tremendous oath! inviolate to kings);
By this I swear:--when bleeding Greece again
Shall call Achilles, she shall call in vain.
When, flush'd with slaughter, Hector comes to spread
The purpled shore with mountains of the dead,
Then shall thou mourn the affront thy madness gave,
Forced to deplore when impotent to save:
Then rage in bitterness of soul to know
This act has made the bravest Greek thy foe."

He spoke; and furious hurl'd against the ground
His sceptre starr'd with golden studs around:
Then sternly silent sat. With like disdain
The raging king return'd his frowns again.

To calm their passion with the words of age,
Slow from his seat arose the Pylian sage,
Experienced Nestor, in persuasion skill'd;
Words, sweet as honey, from his lips distill'd:
Two generations now had pass'd away,
Wise by his rules, and happy by his sway;
Two ages o'er his native realm he reign'd,
And now the example of the third remain'd.
All view'd with awe the venerable man;
Who thus with mild benevolence began:--

"What shame, what woe is this to Greece! what joy
To Troy's proud monarch, and the friends of Troy!
That adverse gods commit to stern debate
The best, the bravest, of the Grecian state.
Young as ye are, this youthful heat restrain,
Nor think your Nestor's years and wisdom vain.
A godlike race of heroes once I knew,
Such as no more these aged eyes shall view!
Lives there a chief to match Pirithous' fame,
Dryas the bold, or Ceneus' deathless name;
Theseus, endued with more than mortal might,
Or Polyphemus, like the gods in fight?
With these of old, to toils of battle bred,
In early youth my hardy days I led;
Fired with the thirst which virtuous envy breeds,
And smit with love of honourable deeds,
Strongest of men, they pierced the mountain boar,
Ranged the wild deserts red with monsters' gore,
And from their hills the shaggy Centaurs tore:
Yet these with soft persuasive arts I sway'd;
When Nestor spoke, they listen'd and obey'd.
If in my youth, even these esteem'd me wise;
Do you, young warriors, hear my age advise.
Atrides, seize not on the beauteous slave;
That prize the Greeks by common suffrage gave:
Nor thou, Achilles, treat our prince with pride;
Let kings be just, and sovereign power preside.
Thee, the first honours of the war adorn,
Like gods in strength, and of a goddess born;
Him, awful majesty exalts above
The powers of earth, and sceptred sons of Jove.
Let both unite with well-consenting mind,
So shall authority with strength be join'd.
Leave me, O king! to calm Achilles' rage;
Rule thou thyself, as more advanced in age.
Forbid it, gods! Achilles should be lost,
The pride of Greece, and bulwark of our host."

This said, he ceased. The king of men replies:
"Thy years are awful, and thy words are wise.
But that imperious, that unconquer'd soul,
No laws can limit, no respect control.
Before his pride must his superiors fall;
His word the law, and he the lord of all?
Him must our hosts, our chiefs, ourself obey?
What king can bear a rival in his sway?
Grant that the gods his matchless force have given;
Has foul reproach a privilege from heaven?"

Here on the monarch's speech Achilles broke,
And furious, thus, and interrupting spoke:
"Tyrant, I well deserved thy galling chain,
To live thy slave, and still to serve in vain,
Should I submit to each unjust decree:--
Command thy vassals, but command not me.
Seize on Briseis, whom the Grecians doom'd
My prize of war, yet tamely see resumed;
And seize secure; no more Achilles draws
His conquering sword in any woman's cause.
The gods command me to forgive the past:
But let this first invasion be the last:
For know, thy blood, when next thou darest invade,
Shall stream in vengeance on my reeking blade."

At this they ceased: the stern debate expired:
The chiefs in sullen majesty retired.

Achilles with Patroclus took his way
Where near his tents his hollow vessels lay.
Meantime Atrides launch'd with numerous oars
A well-rigg'd ship for Chrysa's sacred shores:
High on the deck was fair Chryseis placed,
And sage Ulysses with the conduct graced:
Safe in her sides the hecatomb they stow'd,
Then swiftly sailing, cut the liquid road.

The host to expiate next the king prepares,
With pure lustrations, and with solemn prayers.
Wash'd by the briny wave, the pious train
Are cleansed; and cast the ablutions in the main.
Along the shore whole hecatombs were laid,
And bulls and goats to Phoebus' altars paid;
The sable fumes in curling spires arise,
And waft their grateful odours to the skies.

The army thus in sacred rites engaged,
Atrides still with deep resentment raged.
To wait his will two sacred heralds stood,
Talthybius and Eurybates the good.
"Haste to the fierce Achilles' tent (he cries),
Thence bear Briseis as our royal prize:
Submit he must; or if they will not part,
Ourself in arms shall tear her from his heart."

The unwilling heralds act their lord's commands;
Pensive they walk along the barren sands:
Arrived, the hero in his tent they find,
With gloomy aspect on his arm reclined.
At awful distance long they silent stand,
Loth to advance, and speak their hard command;
Decent confusion! This the godlike man
Perceived, and thus with accent mild began:

"With leave and honour enter our abodes,
Ye sacred ministers of men and gods!
I know your message; by constraint you came;
Not you, but your imperious lord I blame.
Patroclus, haste, the fair Briseis bring;
Conduct my captive to the haughty king.
But witness, heralds, and proclaim my vow,
Witness to gods above, and men below!
But first, and loudest, to your prince declare
(That lawless tyrant whose commands you bear),
Unmoved as death Achilles shall remain,
Though prostrate Greece shall bleed at every vein:
The raging chief in frantic passion lost,
Blind to himself, and useless to his host,
Unskill'd to judge the future by the past,
In blood and slaughter shall repent at last."

Patroclus now the unwilling beauty brought;
She, in soft sorrows, and in pensive thought,
Pass'd silent, as the heralds held her hand,
And of look'd back, slow-moving o'er the strand.
Not so his loss the fierce Achilles bore;
But sad, retiring to the sounding shore,
O'er the wild margin of the deep he hung,
That kindred deep from whence his mother sprung:
There bathed in tears of anger and disdain,
Thus loud lamented to the stormy main:

"O parent goddess! since in early bloom
Thy son must fall, by too severe a doom;
Sure to so short a race of glory born,
Great Jove in justice should this span adorn:
Honour and fame at least the thunderer owed;
And ill he pays the promise of a god,
If yon proud monarch thus thy son defies,
Obscures my glories, and resumes my prize."

Far from the deep recesses of the main,
Where aged Ocean holds his watery reign,
The goddess-mother heard. The waves divide;
And like a mist she rose above the tide;
Beheld him mourning on the naked shores,
And thus the sorrows of his soul explores.
"Why grieves my son? Thy anguish let me share;
Reveal the cause, and trust a parent's care."

He deeply sighing said: "To tell my woe
Is but to mention what too well you know.
From Thebe, sacred to Apollo's name
(Aetion's realm), our conquering army came,
With treasure loaded and triumphant spoils,
Whose just division crown'd the soldier's toils;
But bright Chryseis, heavenly prize! was led,
By vote selected, to the general's bed.
The priest of Phoebus sought by gifts to gain
His beauteous daughter from the victor's chain;
The fleet he reach'd, and, lowly bending down,
Held forth the sceptre and the laurel crown,
Intreating all; but chief implored for grace
The brother-kings of Atreus' royal race:
The generous Greeks their joint consent declare,
The priest to reverence, and release the fair;
Not so Atrides: he, with wonted pride,
The sire insulted, and his gifts denied:
The insulted sire (his god's peculiar care)
To Phoebus pray'd, and Phoebus heard the prayer:
A dreadful plague ensues: the avenging darts
Incessant fly, and pierce the Grecian hearts.
A prophet then, inspired by heaven, arose,
And points the crime, and thence derives the woes:
Myself the first the assembled chiefs incline
To avert the vengeance of the power divine;
Then rising in his wrath, the monarch storm'd;
Incensed he threaten'd, and his threats perform'd:
The fair Chryseis to her sire was sent,
With offer'd gifts to make the god relent;
But now he seized Briseis' heavenly charms,
And of my valour's prize defrauds my arms,
Defrauds the votes of all the Grecian train;
And service, faith, and justice, plead in vain.
But, goddess! thou thy suppliant son attend.
To high Olympus' shining court ascend,
Urge all the ties to former service owed,
And sue for vengeance to the thundering god.
Oft hast thou triumph'd in the glorious boast,
That thou stood'st forth of all the ethereal host,
When bold rebellion shook the realms above,
The undaunted guard of cloud-compelling Jove:
When the bright partner of his awful reign,
The warlike maid, and monarch of the main,
The traitor-gods, by mad ambition driven,
Durst threat with chains the omnipotence of Heaven.
Then, call'd by thee, the monster Titan came
(Whom gods Briareus, men geon name),
Through wondering skies enormous stalk'd along;
Not he that shakes the solid earth so strong:
With giant-pride at Jove's high throne he stands,
And brandish'd round him all his hundred hands:
The affrighted gods confess'd their awful lord,
They dropp'd the fetters, trembled, and adored.
This, goddess, this to his remembrance call,
Embrace his knees, at his tribunal fall;
Conjure him far to drive the Grecian train,
To hurl them headlong to their fleet and main,
To heap the shores with copious death, and bring
The Greeks to know the curse of such a king.
Let Agamemnon lift his haughty head
O'er all his wide dominion of the dead,
And mourn in blood that e'er he durst disgrace
The boldest warrior of the Grecian race."

"Unhappy son! (fair Thetis thus replies,
While tears celestial trickle from her eyes)
Why have I borne thee with a mother's throes,
To Fates averse, and nursed for future woes?
So short a space the light of heaven to view!
So short a space! and fill'd with sorrow too!
O might a parent's careful wish prevail,
Far, far from Ilion should thy vessels sail,
And thou, from camps remote, the danger shun
Which now, alas! too nearly threats my son.
Yet (what I can) to move thy suit I'll go
To great Olympus crown'd with fleecy snow.
Meantime, secure within thy ships, from far
Behold the field, not mingle in the war.
The sire of gods and all the ethereal train,
On the warm limits of the farthest main,
Now mix with mortals, nor disdain to grace
The feasts of thiopia's blameless race,
Twelve days the powers indulge the genial rite,
Returning with the twelfth revolving light.
Then will I mount the brazen dome, and move
The high tribunal of immortal Jove."

The goddess spoke: the rolling waves unclose;
Then down the steep she plunged from whence she rose,
And left him sorrowing on the lonely coast,
In wild resentment for the fair he lost.

In Chrysa's port now sage Ulysses rode;
Beneath the deck the destined victims stow'd:
The sails they furl'd, they lash the mast aside,
And dropp'd their anchors, and the pinnace tied.
Next on the shore their hecatomb they land;
Chryseis last descending on the strand.
Her, thus returning from the furrow'd main,
Ulysses led to Phoebus' sacred fane;
Where at his solemn altar, as the maid
He gave to Chryses, thus the hero said:

"Hail, reverend priest! to Phoebus' awful dome
A suppliant I from great Atrides come:
Unransom'd, here receive the spotless fair;
Accept the hecatomb the Greeks prepare;
And may thy god who scatters darts around,
Atoned by sacrifice, desist to wound."

At this, the sire embraced the maid again,
So sadly lost, so lately sought in vain.
Then near the altar of the darting king,
Disposed in rank their hecatomb they bring;
With water purify their hands, and take
The sacred offering of the salted cake;
While thus with arms devoutly raised in air,
And solemn voice, the priest directs his prayer:

"God of the silver bow, thy ear incline,
Whose power incircles Cilla the divine;
Whose sacred eye thy Tenedos surveys,
And gilds fair Chrysa with distinguish'd rays!
If, fired to vengeance at thy priest's request,
Thy direful darts inflict the raging pest:
Once more attend! avert the wasteful woe,
And smile propitious, and unbend thy bow."

So Chryses pray'd. Apollo heard his prayer:
And now the Greeks their hecatomb prepare;
Between their horns the salted barley threw,
And, with their heads to heaven, the victims slew:
The limbs they sever from the inclosing hide;
The thighs, selected to the gods, divide:
On these, in double cauls involved with art,
The choicest morsels lay from every part.
The priest himself before his altar stands,
And burns the offering with his holy hands.
Pours the black wine, and sees the flames aspire;
The youth with instruments surround the fire:
The thighs thus sacrificed, and entrails dress'd,
The assistants part, transfix, and roast the rest:
Then spread the tables, the repast prepare;
Each takes his seat, and each receives his share.
When now the rage of hunger was repress'd,
With pure libations they conclude the feast;
The youths with wine the copious goblets crown'd,
And, pleased, dispense the flowing bowls around;
With hymns divine the joyous banquet ends,
The paeans lengthen'd till the sun descends:
The Greeks, restored, the grateful notes prolong;
Apollo listens, and approves the song.

'Twas night; the chiefs beside their vessel lie,
Till rosy morn had purpled o'er the sky:
Then launch, and hoist the mast: indulgent gales,
Supplied by Phoebus, fill the swelling sails;
The milk-white canvas bellying as they blow,
The parted ocean foams and roars below:
Above the bounding billows swift they flew,
Till now the Grecian camp appear'd in view.
Far on the beach they haul their bark to land,
(The crooked keel divides the yellow sand,)
Then part, where stretch'd along the winding bay,
The ships and tents in mingled prospect lay.

But raging still, amidst his navy sat
The stern Achilles, stedfast in his hate;
Nor mix'd in combat, nor in council join'd;
But wasting cares lay heavy on his mind:
In his black thoughts revenge and slaughter roll,
And scenes of blood rise dreadful in his soul.

Twelve days were past, and now the dawning light
The gods had summon'd to the Olympian height:
Jove, first ascending from the watery bowers,
Leads the long order of ethereal powers.
When, like the morning-mist in early day,
Rose from the flood the daughter of the sea:
And to the seats divine her flight address'd.
There, far apart, and high above the rest,
The thunderer sat; where old Olympus shrouds
His hundred heads in heaven, and props the clouds.
Suppliant the goddess stood: one hand she placed
Beneath his beard, and one his knees embraced.
"If e'er, O father of the gods! (she said)
My words could please thee, or my actions aid,
Some marks of honour on my son bestow,
And pay in glory what in life you owe.
Fame is at least by heavenly promise due
To life so short, and now dishonour'd too.
Avenge this wrong, O ever just and wise!
Let Greece be humbled, and the Trojans rise;
Till the proud king and all the Achaian race
Shall heap with honours him they now disgrace."

Thus Thetis spoke; but Jove in silence held
The sacred counsels of his breast conceal'd.
Not so repulsed, the goddess closer press'd,
Still grasp'd his knees, and urged the dear request.
"O sire of gods and men! thy suppliant hear;
Refuse, or grant; for what has Jove to fear?
Or oh! declare, of all the powers above,
Is wretched Thetis least the care of Jove?"

She said; and, sighing, thus the god replies,
Who rolls the thunder o'er the vaulted skies:

"What hast thou ask'd? ah, why should Jove engage
In foreign contests and domestic rage,
The gods' complaints, and Juno's fierce alarms,
While I, too partial, aid the Trojan arms?
Go, lest the haughty partner of my sway
With jealous eyes thy close access survey;
But part in peace, secure thy prayer is sped:
Witness the sacred honours of our head,
The nod that ratifies the will divine,
The faithful, fix'd, irrevocable sign;
This seals thy suit, and this fulfils thy vows--"
He spoke, and awful bends his sable brows,
Shakes his ambrosial curls, and gives the nod,
The stamp of fate and sanction of the god:
High heaven with trembling the dread signal took,
And all Olympus to the centre shook.

Swift to the seas profound the goddess flies,
Jove to his starry mansions in the skies.
The shining synod of the immortals wait
The coming god, and from their thrones of state
Arising silent, wrapp'd in holy fear,
Before the majesty of heaven appear.
Trembling they stand, while Jove assumes the throne,
All, but the god's imperious queen alone:
Late had she view'd the silver-footed dame,
And all her passions kindled into flame.
"Say, artful manager of heaven (she cries),
Who now partakes the secrets of the skies?
Thy Juno knows not the decrees of fate,
In vain the partner of imperial state.
What favourite goddess then those cares divides,
Which Jove in prudence from his consort hides?"

To this the thunderer: "Seek not thou to find
The sacred counsels of almighty mind:
Involved in darkness likes the great decree,
Nor can the depths of fate be pierced by thee.
What fits thy knowledge, thou the first shalt know;
The first of gods above, and men below;
But thou, nor they, shall search the thoughts that roll
Deep in the close recesses of my soul."

Full on the sire the goddess of the skies
Roll'd the large orbs of her majestic eyes,
And thus return'd:--"Austere Saturnius, say,
From whence this wrath, or who controls thy sway?
Thy boundless will, for me, remains in force,
And all thy counsels take the destined course.
But 'tis for Greece I fear: for late was seen,
In close consult, the silver-footed queen.
Jove to his Thetis nothing could deny,
Nor was the signal vain that shook the sky.
What fatal favour has the goddess won,
To grace her fierce, inexorable son?
Perhaps in Grecian blood to drench the plain,
And glut his vengeance with my people slain."

Then thus the god: "O restless fate of pride,
That strives to learn what heaven resolves to hide;
Vain is the search, presumptuous and abhorr'd,
Anxious to thee, and odious to thy lord.
Let this suffice: the immutable decree
No force can shake: what is, that ought to be.
Goddess, submit; nor dare our will withstand,
But dread the power of this avenging hand:
The united strength of all the gods above
In vain resists the omnipotence of Jove."

The thunderer spoke, nor durst the queen reply;
A reverent horror silenced all the sky.
The feast disturb'd, with sorrow Vulcan saw
His mother menaced, and the gods in awe;
Peace at his heart, and pleasure his design,
Thus interposed the architect divine:
"The wretched quarrels of the mortal state
Are far unworthy, gods! of your debate:
Let men their days in senseless strife employ,
We, in eternal peace and constant joy.
Thou, goddess-mother, with our sire comply,
Nor break the sacred union of the sky:
Lest, roused to rage, he shake the bless'd abodes,
Launch the red lightning, and dethrone the gods.
If you submit, the thunderer stands appeased;
The gracious power is willing to be pleased."

Thus Vulcan spoke: and rising with a bound,
The double bowl with sparkling nectar crown'd,
Which held to Juno in a cheerful way,
"Goddess (he cried), be patient and obey.
Dear as you are, if Jove his arm extend,
I can but grieve, unable to defend
What god so daring in your aid to move,
Or lift his hand against the force of Jove?
Once in your cause I felt his matchless might,
Hurl'd headlong down from the ethereal height;
Toss'd all the day in rapid circles round,
Nor till the sun descended touch'd the ground.
Breathless I fell, in giddy motion lost;
The Sinthians raised me on the Lemnian coast;

He said, and to her hands the goblet heaved,
Which, with a smile, the white-arm'd queen received
Then, to the rest he fill'd; and in his turn,
Each to his lips applied the nectar'd urn,
Vulcan with awkward grace his office plies,
And unextinguish'd laughter shakes the skies.

Thus the blest gods the genial day prolong,
In feasts ambrosial, and celestial song.
Apollo tuned the lyre; the Muses round
With voice alternate aid the silver sound.
Meantime the radiant sun to mortal sight
Descending swift, roll'd down the rapid light:
Then to their starry domes the gods depart,
The shining monuments of Vulcan's art:
Jove on his couch reclined his awful head,
And Juno slumber'd on the golden bed.

Now pleasing sleep had seal'd each mortal eye,
Stretch'd in the tents the Grecian leaders lie:
The immortals slumber'd on their thrones above;
All, but the ever-wakeful eyes of Jove.
To honour Thetis' son he bends his care,
And plunge the Greeks in all the woes of war:
Then bids an empty phantom rise to sight,
And thus commands the vision of the night.

"Fly hence, deluding Dream! and light as air,
To Agamemnon's ample tent repair.
Bid him in arms draw forth the embattled train,
Lead all his Grecians to the dusty plain.
Declare, e'en now 'tis given him to destroy
The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
For now no more the gods with fate contend,
At Juno's suit the heavenly factions end.
Destruction hangs o'er yon devoted wall,
And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall."

Swift as the word the vain illusion fled,
Descends, and hovers o'er Atrides' head;
Clothed in the figure of the Pylian sage,
Renown'd for wisdom, and revered for age:
Around his temples spreads his golden wing,
And thus the flattering dream deceives the king.

"Canst thou, with all a monarch's cares oppress'd,
O Atreus' son! canst thou indulge the rest?
Ill fits a chief who mighty nations guides,
Directs in council, and in war presides,
To whom its safety a whole people owes,
To waste long nights in indolent repose.
Monarch, awake! 'tis Jove's command I bear;
Thou, and thy glory, claim his heavenly care.
In just array draw forth the embattled train,
Lead all thy Grecians to the dusty plain;
E'en now, O king! 'tis given thee to destroy
The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
For now no more the gods with fate contend,
At Juno's suit the heavenly factions end.
Destruction hangs o'er yon devoted wall,
And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.
Awake, but waking this advice approve,
And trust the vision that descends from Jove."

The phantom said; then vanish'd from his sight,
Resolves to air, and mixes with the night.
A thousand schemes the monarch's mind employ;
Elate in thought he sacks untaken Troy:
Vain as he was, and to the future blind,
Nor saw what Jove and secret fate design'd,
What mighty toils to either host remain,
What scenes of grief, and numbers of the slain!
Eager he rises, and in fancy hears
The voice celestial murmuring in his ears.
First on his limbs a slender vest he drew,
Around him next the regal mantle threw,
The embroider'd sandals on his feet were tied;
The starry falchion glitter'd at his side;
And last, his arm the massy sceptre loads,
Unstain'd, immortal, and the gift of gods.

Now rosy Morn ascends the court of Jove,
Lifts up her light, and opens day above.
The king despatch'd his heralds with commands
To range the camp and summon all the bands:
The gathering hosts the monarch's word obey;
While to the fleet Atrides bends his way.
In his black ship the Pylian prince he found;
There calls a senate of the peers around:
The assembly placed, the king of men express'd
The counsels labouring in his artful breast.

"Friends and confederates! with attentive ear
Receive my words, and credit what you hear.
Late as I slumber'd in the shades of night,
A dream divine appear'd before my sight;
Whose visionary form like Nestor came,
The same in habit, and in mien the same.
The heavenly phantom hover'd o'er my head,
'And, dost thou sleep, O Atreus' son? (he said)
Ill fits a chief who mighty nations guides,
Directs in council, and in war presides;
To whom its safety a whole people owes,
To waste long nights in indolent repose.
Monarch, awake! 'tis Jove's command I bear,
Thou and thy glory claim his heavenly care.
In just array draw forth the embattled train,
And lead the Grecians to the dusty plain;
E'en now, O king! 'tis given thee to destroy
The lofty towers of wide-extended Troy.
For now no more the gods with fate contend,
At Juno's suit the heavenly factions end.
Destruction hangs o'er yon devoted wall,
And nodding Ilion waits the impending fall.

This hear observant, and the gods obey!'
The vision spoke, and pass'd in air away.
Now, valiant chiefs! since heaven itself alarms,
Unite, and rouse the sons of Greece to arms.
But first, with caution, try what yet they dare,
Worn with nine years of unsuccessful war.
To move the troops to measure back the main,
Be mine; and yours the province to detain."

He spoke, and sat: when Nestor, rising said,
(Nestor, whom Pylos' sandy realms obey'd,)
"Princes of Greece, your faithful ears incline,
Nor doubt the vision of the powers divine;
Sent by great Jove to him who rules the host,
Forbid it, heaven! this warning should be lost!
Then let us haste, obey the god's alarms,
And join to rouse the sons of Greece to arms."

Thus spoke the sage: the kings without delay
Dissolve the council, and their chief obey:
The sceptred rulers lead; the following host,
Pour'd forth by thousands, darkens all the coast.
As from some rocky cleft the shepherd sees
Clustering in heaps on heaps the driving bees,
Rolling and blackening, swarms succeeding swarms,
With deeper murmurs and more hoarse alarms;
Dusky they spread, a close embodied crowd,
And o'er the vale descends the living cloud.
So, from the tents and ships, a lengthen'd train
Spreads all the beach, and wide o'ershades the plain:
Along the region runs a deafening sound;
Beneath their footsteps groans the trembling ground.
Fame flies before the messenger of Jove,
And shining soars, and claps her wings above.
Nine sacred heralds now, proclaiming loud
The monarch's will, suspend the listening crowd.
Soon as the throngs in order ranged appear,
And fainter murmurs died upon the ear,
The king of kings his awful figure raised:
High in his hand the golden sceptre blazed;
The golden sceptre, of celestial flame,
By Vulcan form'd, from Jove to Hermes came.
To Pelops he the immortal gift resign'd;
The immortal gift great Pelops left behind,
In Atreus' hand, which not with Atreus ends,
To rich Thyestes next the prize descends;
And now the mark of Agamemnon's reign,
Subjects all Argos, and controls the main.

On this bright sceptre now the king reclined,
And artful thus pronounced the speech design'd:
"Ye sons of Mars, partake your leader's care,
Heroes of Greece, and brothers of the war!
Of partial Jove with justice I complain,
And heavenly oracles believed in vain
A safe return was promised to our toils,
Renown'd, triumphant, and enrich'd with spoils.
Now shameful flight alone can save the host,
Our blood, our treasure, and our glory lost.
So Jove decrees, resistless lord of all!
At whose command whole empires rise or fall:
He shakes the feeble props of human trust,
And towns and armies humbles to the dust
What shame to Greece a fruitful war to wage,
Oh, lasting shame in every future age!
Once great in arms, the common scorn we grow,
Repulsed and baffled by a feeble foe.
So small their number, that if wars were ceased,
And Greece triumphant held a general feast,
All rank'd by tens, whole decades when they dine
Must want a Trojan slave to pour the wine.
But other forces have our hopes o'erthrown,
And Troy prevails by armies not her own.
Now nine long years of mighty Jove are run,
Since first the labours of this war begun:
Our cordage torn, decay'd our vessels lie,
And scarce insure the wretched power to fly.
Haste, then, for ever leave the Trojan wall!
Our weeping wives, our tender children call:
Love, duty, safety, summon us away,
'Tis nature's voice, and nature we obey,
Our shatter'd barks may yet transport us o'er,
Safe and inglorious, to our native shore.
Fly, Grecians, fly, your sails and oars employ,
And dream no more of heaven-defended Troy."

His deep design unknown, the hosts approve
Atrides' speech. The mighty numbers move.
So roll the billows to the Icarian shore,
From east and south when winds begin to roar,
Burst their dark mansions in the clouds, and sweep
The whitening surface of the ruffled deep.
And as on corn when western gusts descend,
Before the blast the lofty harvests bend:
Thus o'er the field the moving host appears,
With nodding plumes and groves of waving spears.
The gathering murmur spreads, their trampling feet
Beat the loose sands, and thicken to the fleet;
With long-resounding cries they urge the train
To fit the ships, and launch into the main.
They toil, they sweat, thick clouds of dust arise,
The doubling clamours echo to the skies.
E'en then the Greeks had left the hostile plain,
And fate decreed the fall of Troy in vain;
But Jove's imperial queen their flight survey'd,
And sighing thus bespoke the blue-eyed maid:

"Shall then the Grecians fly! O dire disgrace!
And leave unpunish'd this perfidious race?
Shall Troy, shall Priam, and the adulterous spouse,
In peace enjoy the fruits of broken vows?
And bravest chiefs, in Helen's quarrel slain,
Lie unrevenged on yon detested plain?
No: let my Greeks, unmoved by vain alarms,
Once more refulgent shine in brazen arms.
Haste, goddess, haste! the flying host detain,
Nor let one sail be hoisted on the main."

Pallas obeys, and from Olympus' height
Swift to the ships precipitates her flight.
Ulysses, first in public cares, she found,
For prudent counsel like the gods renown'd:
Oppress'd with generous grief the hero stood,
Nor drew his sable vessels to the flood.
"And is it thus, divine Laertes' son,
Thus fly the Greeks (the martial maid begun),
Thus to their country bear their own disgrace,
And fame eternal leave to Priam's race?
Shall beauteous Helen still remain unfreed,
Still unrevenged, a thousand heroes bleed!
Haste, generous Ithacus! prevent the shame,
Recall your armies, and your chiefs reclaim.
Your own resistless eloquence employ,
And to the immortals trust the fall of Troy."

The voice divine confess'd the warlike maid,
Ulysses heard, nor uninspired obey'd:
Then meeting first Atrides, from his hand
Received the imperial sceptre of command.
Thus graced, attention and respect to gain,
He runs, he flies through all the Grecian train;
Each prince of name, or chief in arms approved,
He fired with praise, or with persuasion moved.

"Warriors like you, with strength and wisdom bless'd,
By brave examples should confirm the rest.
The monarch's will not yet reveal'd appears;
He tries our courage, but resents our fears.
The unwary Greeks his fury may provoke;
Not thus the king in secret council spoke.
Jove loves our chief, from Jove his honour springs,
Beware! for dreadful is the wrath of kings."

But if a clamorous vile plebeian rose,
Him with reproof he check'd or tamed with blows.
"Be still, thou slave, and to thy betters yield;
Unknown alike in council and in field!
Ye gods, what dastards would our host command!
Swept to the war, the lumber of a land.
Be silent, wretch, and think not here allow'd
That worst of tyrants, an usurping crowd.
To one sole monarch Jove commits the sway;
His are the laws, and him let all obey."

With words like these the troops Ulysses ruled,
The loudest silenced, and the fiercest cool'd.
Back to the assembly roll the thronging train,
Desert the ships, and pour upon the plain.
Murmuring they move, as when old ocean roars,
And heaves huge surges to the trembling shores;
The groaning banks are burst with bellowing sound,
The rocks remurmur and the deeps rebound.
At length the tumult sinks, the noises cease,
And a still silence lulls the camp to peace.
Thersites only clamour'd in the throng,
Loquacious, loud, and turbulent of tongue:
Awed by no shame, by no respect controll'd,
In scandal busy, in reproaches bold:
With witty malice studious to defame,
Scorn all his joy, and laughter all his aim:--
But chief he gloried with licentious style
To lash the great, and monarchs to revile.
His figure such as might his soul proclaim;
One eye was blinking, and one leg was lame:
His mountain shoulders half his breast o'erspread,
Thin hairs bestrew'd his long misshapen head.
Spleen to mankind his envious heart possess'd,
And much he hated all, but most the best:
Ulysses or Achilles still his theme;
But royal scandal his delight supreme,
Long had he lived the scorn of every Greek,
Vex'd when he spoke, yet still they heard him speak.
Sharp was his voice; which in the shrillest tone,
Thus with injurious taunts attack'd the throne.

"Amidst the glories of so bright a reign,
What moves the great Atrides to complain?
'Tis thine whate'er the warrior's breast inflames,
The golden spoil, and thine the lovely dames.
With all the wealth our wars and blood bestow,
Thy tents are crowded and thy chests o'erflow.
Thus at full ease in heaps of riches roll'd,
What grieves the monarch? Is it thirst of gold?
Say, shall we march with our unconquer'd powers
(The Greeks and I) to Ilion's hostile towers,
And bring the race of royal bastards here,
For Troy to ransom at a price too dear?
But safer plunder thy own host supplies;
Say, wouldst thou seize some valiant leader's prize?
Or, if thy heart to generous love be led,
Some captive fair, to bless thy kingly bed?
Whate'er our master craves submit we must,
Plagued with his pride, or punish'd for his lust.
Oh women of Achaia; men no more!
Hence let us fly, and let him waste his store
In loves and pleasures on the Phrygian shore.
We may be wanted on some busy day,
When Hector comes: so great Achilles may:
From him he forced the prize we jointly gave,
From him, the fierce, the fearless, and the brave:
And durst he, as he ought, resent that wrong,
This mighty tyrant were no tyrant long."

Fierce from his seat at this Ulysses springs,
In generous vengeance of the king of kings.
With indignation sparkling in his eyes,
He views the wretch, and sternly thus replies:

"Peace, factious monster, born to vex the state,
With wrangling talents form'd for foul debate:
Curb that impetuous tongue, nor rashly vain,
And singly mad, asperse the sovereign reign.
Have we not known thee, slave! of all our host,
The man who acts the least, upbraids the most?
Think not the Greeks to shameful flight to bring,
Nor let those lips profane the name of king.
For our return we trust the heavenly powers;
Be that their care; to fight like men be ours.
But grant the host with wealth the general load,
Except detraction, what hast thou bestow'd?
Suppose some hero should his spoils resign,
Art thou that hero, could those spoils be thine?
Gods! let me perish on this hateful shore,
And let these eyes behold my son no more;
If, on thy next offence, this hand forbear
To strip those arms thou ill deserv'st to wear,
Expel the council where our princes meet,
And send thee scourged and howling through the fleet."

He said, and cowering as the dastard bends,
The weighty sceptre on his bank descends.
On the round bunch the bloody tumours rise:
The tears spring starting from his haggard eyes;
Trembling he sat, and shrunk in abject fears,
From his vile visage wiped the scalding tears;
While to his neighbour each express'd his thought:

"Ye gods! what wonders has Ulysses wrought!
What fruits his conduct and his courage yield!
Great in the council, glorious in the field.
Generous he rises in the crown's defence,
To curb the factious tongue of insolence,
Such just examples on offenders shown,
Sedition silence, and assert the throne."

'Twas thus the general voice the hero praised,
Who, rising, high the imperial sceptre raised:
The blue-eyed Pallas, his celestial friend,
(In form a herald,) bade the crowds attend.
The expecting crowds in still attention hung,
To hear the wisdom of his heavenly tongue.
Then deeply thoughtful, pausing ere he spoke,
His silence thus the prudent hero broke:

"Unhappy monarch! whom the Grecian race
With shame deserting, heap with vile disgrace.
Not such at Argos was their generous vow:
Once all their voice, but ah! forgotten now:
Ne'er to return, was then the common cry,
Till Troy's proud structures should in ashes lie.
Behold them weeping for their native shore;
What could their wives or helpless children more?
What heart but melts to leave the tender train,
And, one short month, endure the wintry main?
Few leagues removed, we wish our peaceful seat,
When the ship tosses, and the tempests beat:
Then well may this long stay provoke their tears,
The tedious length of nine revolving years.
Not for their grief the Grecian host I blame;
But vanquish'd! baffled! oh, eternal shame!
Expect the time to Troy's destruction given.
And try the faith of Chalcas and of heaven.
What pass'd at Aulis, Greece can witness bear,
And all who live to breathe this Phrygian air.
Beside a fountain's sacred brink we raised
Our verdant altars, and the victims blazed:
'Twas where the plane-tree spread its shades around,
The altars heaved; and from the crumbling ground
A mighty dragon shot, of dire portent;
From Jove himself the dreadful sign was sent.
Straight to the tree his sanguine spires he roll'd,
And curl'd around in many a winding fold;
The topmost branch a mother-bird possess'd;
Eight callow infants fill'd the mossy nest;
Herself the ninth; the serpent, as he hung,
Stretch'd his black jaws and crush'd the crying young;
While hovering near, with miserable moan,
The drooping mother wail'd her children gone.
The mother last, as round the nest she flew,
Seized by the beating wing, the monster slew;
Nor long survived: to marble turn'd, he stands
A lasting prodigy on Aulis' sands.
Such was the will of Jove; and hence we dare
Trust in his omen, and support the war.
For while around we gazed with wondering eyes,
And trembling sought the powers with sacrifice,
Full of his god, the reverend Chalcas cried,
'Ye Grecian warriors! lay your fears aside.
This wondrous signal Jove himself displays,
Of long, long labours, but eternal praise.
As many birds as by the snake were slain,
So many years the toils of Greece remain;
But wait the tenth, for Ilion's fall decreed:'
Thus spoke the prophet, thus the Fates succeed.
Obey, ye Grecians! with submission wait,
Nor let your flight avert the Trojan fate."
He said: the shores with loud applauses sound,
The hollow ships each deafening shout rebound.
Then Nestor thus--"These vain debates forbear,
Ye talk like children, not like heroes dare.
Where now are all your high resolves at last?
Your leagues concluded, your engagements past?
Vow'd with libations and with victims then,
Now vanish'd like their smoke: the faith of men!
While useless words consume the unactive hours,
No wonder Troy so long resists our powers.
Rise, great Atrides! and with courage sway;
We march to war, if thou direct the way.
But leave the few that dare resist thy laws,
The mean deserters of the Grecian cause,
To grudge the conquests mighty Jove prepares,
And view with envy our successful wars.
On that great day, when first the martial train,
Big with the fate of Ilion, plough'd the main,
Jove, on the right, a prosperous signal sent,
And thunder rolling shook the firmament.
Encouraged hence, maintain the glorious strife,
Till every soldier grasp a Phrygian wife,
Till Helen's woes at full revenged appear,
And Troy's proud matrons render tear for tear.
Before that day, if any Greek invite
His country's troops to base, inglorious flight,
Stand forth that Greek! and hoist his sail to fly,
And die the dastard first, who dreads to die.
But now, O monarch! all thy chiefs advise:
Nor what they offer, thou thyself despise.
Among those counsels, let not mine be vain;
In tribes and nations to divide thy train:
His separate troops let every leader call,
Each strengthen each, and all encourage all.
What chief, or soldier, of the numerous band,
Or bravely fights, or ill obeys command,
When thus distinct they war, shall soon be known
And what the cause of Ilion not o'erthrown;
If fate resists, or if our arms are slow,
If gods above prevent, or men below."

To him the king: "How much thy years excel
In arts of counsel, and in speaking well!
O would the gods, in love to Greece, decree
But ten such sages as they grant in thee;
Such wisdom soon should Priam's force destroy,
And soon should fall the haughty towers of Troy!
But Jove forbids, who plunges those he hates
In fierce contention and in vain debates:
Now great Achilles from our aid withdraws,
By me provoked; a captive maid the cause:
If e'er as friends we join, the Trojan wall
Must shake, and heavy will the vengeance fall!
But now, ye warriors, take a short repast;
And, well refresh'd, to bloody conflict haste.
His sharpen'd spear let every Grecian wield,
And every Grecian fix his brazen shield,
Let all excite the fiery steeds of war,
And all for combat fit the rattling car.
This day, this dreadful day, let each contend;
No rest, no respite, till the shades descend;
Till darkness, or till death, shall cover all:
Let the war bleed, and let the mighty fall;
Till bathed in sweat be every manly breast,
With the huge shield each brawny arm depress'd,
Each aching nerve refuse the lance to throw,
And each spent courser at the chariot blow.
Who dares, inglorious, in his ships to stay,
Who dares to tremble on this signal day;
That wretch, too mean to fall by martial power,
The birds shall mangle, and the dogs devour."

The monarch spoke; and straight a murmur rose,
Loud as the surges when the tempest blows,
That dash'd on broken rocks tumultuous roar,
And foam and thunder on the stony shore.
Straight to the tents the troops dispersing bend,
The fires are kindled, and the smokes ascend;
With hasty feasts they sacrifice, and pray,
To avert the dangers of the doubtful day.
A steer of five years' age, large limb'd, and fed,
To Jove's high altars Agamemnon led:
There bade the noblest of the Grecian peers;
And Nestor first, as most advanced in years.
Next came Idomeneus,
and Tydeus' son,
Ajax the less, and Ajax Telamon;
Then wise Ulysses in his rank was placed;
And Menelaus came, unbid, the last.
The chiefs surround the destined beast, and take
The sacred offering of the salted cake:
When thus the king prefers his solemn prayer;
"O thou! whose thunder rends the clouded air,
Who in the heaven of heavens hast fixed thy throne,
Supreme of gods! unbounded, and alone!
Hear! and before the burning sun descends,
Before the night her gloomy veil extends,
Low in the dust be laid yon hostile spires,
Be Priam's palace sunk in Grecian fires.
In Hector's breast be plunged this shining sword,
And slaughter'd heroes groan around their lord!"

Thus prayed the chief: his unavailing prayer
Great Jove refused, and toss'd in empty air:
The God averse, while yet the fumes arose,
Prepared new toils, and doubled woes on woes.
Their prayers perform'd the chiefs the rite pursue,
The barley sprinkled, and the victim slew.
The limbs they sever from the inclosing hide,
The thighs, selected to the gods, divide.
On these, in double cauls involved with art,
The choicest morsels lie from every part,
From the cleft wood the crackling flames aspire
While the fat victims feed the sacred fire.
The thighs thus sacrificed, and entrails dress'd
The assistants part, transfix, and roast the rest;
Then spread the tables, the repast prepare,
Each takes his seat, and each receives his share.
Soon as the rage of hunger was suppress'd,
The generous Nestor thus the prince address'd.

"Now bid thy heralds sound the loud alarms,
And call the squadrons sheathed in brazen arms;
Now seize the occasion, now the troops survey,
And lead to war when heaven directs the way."

He said; the monarch issued his commands;
Straight the loud heralds call the gathering bands
The chiefs inclose their king; the hosts divide,
In tribes and nations rank'd on either side.
High in the midst the blue-eyed virgin flies;
From rank to rank she darts her ardent eyes;
The dreadful aegis, Jove's immortal shield,
Blazed on her arm, and lighten'd all the field:
Round the vast orb a hundred serpents roll'd,
Form'd the bright fringe, and seem'd to burn in gold,
With this each Grecian's manly breast she warms,
Swells their bold hearts, and strings their nervous arms,
No more they sigh, inglorious, to return,
But breathe revenge, and for the combat burn.

As on some mountain, through the lofty grove,
The crackling flames ascend, and blaze above;
The fires expanding, as the winds arise,
Shoot their long beams, and kindle half the skies:
So from the polish'd arms, and brazen shields,
A gleamy splendour flash'd along the fields.
Not less their number than the embodied cranes,
Or milk-white swans in Asius' watery plains.
That, o'er the windings of Cayster's springs,
Stretch their long necks, and clap their rustling wings,
Now tower aloft, and course in airy rounds,
Now light with noise; with noise the field resounds.
Thus numerous and confused, extending wide,
The legions crowd Scamander's flowery side;
With rushing troops the plains are cover'd o'er,
And thundering footsteps shake the sounding shore.
Along the river's level meads they stand,
Thick as in spring the flowers adorn the land,
Or leaves the trees; or thick as insects play,
The wandering nation of a summer's day:
That, drawn by milky steams, at evening hours,
In gather'd swarms surround the rural bowers;
From pail to pail with busy murmur run
The gilded legions, glittering in the sun.
So throng'd, so close, the Grecian squadrons stood
In radiant arms, and thirst for Trojan blood.
Each leader now his scatter'd force conjoins
In close array, and forms the deepening lines.
Not with more ease the skilful shepherd-swain
Collects his flocks from thousands on the plain.
The king of kings, majestically tall,
Towers o'er his armies, and outshines them all;
Like some proud bull, that round the pastures leads
His subject herds, the monarch of the meads,
Great as the gods, the exalted chief was seen,
His strength like Neptune, and like Mars his mien;
Jove o'er his eyes celestial glories spread,
And dawning conquest played around his head.

Say, virgins, seated round the throne divine,
All-knowing goddesses! immortal nine!
Since earth's wide regions, heaven's umneasur'd height,
And hell's abyss, hide nothing from your sight,
(We, wretched mortals! lost in doubts below,
But guess by rumour, and but boast we know,)
O say what heroes, fired by thirst of fame,
Or urged by wrongs, to Troy's destruction came.
To count them all, demands a thousand tongues,
A throat of brass, and adamantine lungs.
Daughters of Jove, assist! inspired by you
The mighty labour dauntless I pursue;
What crowded armies, from what climes they bring,
Their names, their numbers, and their chiefs I sing.

The hardy warriors whom Boeotia bred,
Penelius, Leitus, Prothoenor, led:
With these Arcesilaus and Clonius stand,
Equal in arms, and equal in command.
These head the troops that rocky Aulis yields,
And Eteon's hills, and Hyrie's watery fields,
And Schoenos, Scholos, Graea near the main,
And Mycalessia's ample piny plain;
Those who in Peteon or Ilesion dwell,
Or Harma where Apollo's prophet fell;
Heleon and Hyle, which the springs o'erflow;
And Medeon lofty, and Ocalea low;
Or in the meads of Haliartus stray,
Or Thespia sacred to the god of day:
Onchestus, Neptune's celebrated groves;
Copae, and Thisbe, famed for silver doves;
For flocks Erythrae, Glissa for the vine;
Platea green, and Nysa the divine;
And they whom Thebe's well-built walls inclose,
Where Myde, Eutresis, Corone, rose;
And Arne rich, with purple harvests crown'd;
And Anthedon, Boeotia's utmost bound.
Full fifty ships they send, and each conveys
Twice sixty warriors through the foaming seas.

To these succeed Aspledon's martial train,
Who plough the spacious Orchomenian plain.
Two valiant brothers rule the undaunted throng,
Ialmen and Ascalaphus the strong:
Sons of Astyoche, the heavenly fair,
Whose virgin charms subdued the god of war:
(In Actor's court as she retired to rest,
The strength of Mars the blushing maid compress'd)
Their troops in thirty sable vessels sweep,
With equal oars, the hoarse-resounding deep.

The Phocians next in forty barks repair;
Epistrophus and Schedius head the war:
From those rich regions where Cephisus leads
His silver current through the flowery meads;
From Panopea, Chrysa the divine,
Where Anemoria's stately turrets shine,
Where Pytho, Daulis, Cyparissus stood,
And fair Lilaea views the rising flood.
These, ranged in order on the floating tide,
Close, on the left, the bold Boeotians' side.

Fierce Ajax led the Locrian squadrons on,
Ajax the less, Oileus' valiant son;
Skill'd to direct the flying dart aright;
Swift in pursuit, and active in the fight.
Him, as their chief, the chosen troops attend,
Which Bessa, Thronus, and rich Cynos send;
Opus, Calliarus, and Scarphe's bands;
And those who dwell where pleasing Augia stands,
And where Boagrius floats the lowly lands,
Or in fair Tarphe's sylvan seats reside:
In forty vessels cut the yielding tide.

Euboea next her martial sons prepares,
And sends the brave Abantes to the wars:
Breathing revenge, in arms they take their way
From Chalcis' walls, and strong Eretria;
The Isteian fields for generous vines renown'd,
The fair Caristos, and the Styrian ground;
Where Dios from her towers o'erlooks the plain,
And high Cerinthus views the neighbouring main.
Down their broad shoulders falls a length of hair;
Their hands dismiss not the long lance in air;
But with protended spears in fighting fields
Pierce the tough corslets and the brazen shields.
Twice twenty ships transport the warlike bands,
Which bold Elphenor, fierce in arms, commands.

Full fifty more from Athens stem the main,
Led by Menestheus through the liquid plain.
(Athens the fair, where great Erectheus sway'd,
That owed his nurture to the blue-eyed maid,
But from the teeming furrow took his birth,
The mighty offspring of the foodful earth.
Him Pallas placed amidst her wealthy fane,
Adored with sacrifice and oxen slain;
Where, as the years revolve, her altars blaze,
And all the tribes resound the goddess' praise.)
No chief like thee, Menestheus! Greece could yield,
To marshal armies in the dusty field,
The extended wings of battle to display,
Or close the embodied host in firm array.
Nestor alone, improved by length of days,
For martial conduct bore an equal praise.

With these appear the Salaminian bands,
Whom the gigantic Telamon commands;
In twelve black ships to Troy they steer their course,
And with the great Athenians join their force.

Next move to war the generous Argive train,
From high Troezene, and Maseta's plain,
And fair gina circled by the main:
Whom strong Tyrinthe's lofty walls surround,
And Epidaure with viny harvests crown'd:
And where fair Asinen and Hermoin show
Their cliffs above, and ample bay below.
These by the brave Euryalus were led,
Great Sthenelus, and greater Diomed;
But chief Tydides bore the sovereign sway:
In fourscore barks they plough the watery way.

The proud Mycene arms her martial powers,
Cleone, Corinth, with imperial towers,
Fair Araethyrea, Ornia's fruitful plain,
And gion, and Adrastus' ancient reign;
And those who dwell along the sandy shore,
And where Pellene yields her fleecy store,
Where Helice and Hyperesia lie,
And Gonoessa's spires salute the sky.
Great Agamemnon rules the numerous band,
A hundred vessels in long order stand,
And crowded nations wait his dread command.
High on the deck the king of men appears,
And his refulgent arms in triumph wears;
Proud of his host, unrivall'd in his reign,
In silent pomp he moves along the main.

His brother follows, and to vengeance warms
The hardy Spartans, exercised in arms:
Phares and Brysia's valiant troops, and those
Whom Lacedaemon's lofty hills inclose;
Or Messe's towers for silver doves renown'd,
Amyclae, Laas, Augia's happy ground,
And those whom Oetylos' low walls contain,
And Helos, on the margin of the main:
These, o'er the bending ocean, Helen's cause,
In sixty ships with Menelaus draws:
Eager and loud from man to man he flies,
Revenge and fury flaming in his eyes;
While vainly fond, in fancy oft he hears
The fair one's grief, and sees her falling tears.

In ninety sail, from Pylos' sandy coast,
Nestor the sage conducts his chosen host:
From Amphigenia's ever-fruitful land,
Where py high, and little Pteleon stand;
Where beauteous Arene her structures shows,
And Thryon's walls Alpheus' streams inclose:
And Dorion, famed for Thamyris' disgrace,
Superior once of all the tuneful race,
Till, vain of mortals' empty praise, he strove
To match the seed of cloud-compelling Jove!
Too daring bard! whose unsuccessful pride
The immortal Muses in their art defied.
The avenging Muses of the light of day
Deprived his eyes, and snatch'd his voice away;
No more his heavenly voice was heard to sing,
His hand no more awaked the silver string.

Where under high Cyllene, crown'd with wood,
The shaded tomb of old pytus stood;
From Ripe, Stratie, Tegea's bordering towns,
The Phenean fields, and Orchomenian downs,
Where the fat herds in plenteous pasture rove;
And Stymphelus with her surrounding grove;
Parrhasia, on her snowy cliffs reclined,
And high Enispe shook by wintry wind,
And fair Mantinea's ever-pleasing site;
In sixty sail the Arcadian bands unite.
Bold Agapenor, glorious at their head,
(Ancaeus' son) the mighty squadron led.
Their ships, supplied by Agamemnon's care,
Through roaring seas the wondering warriors bear;
The first to battle on the appointed plain,
But new to all the dangers of the main.

Those, where fair Elis and Buprasium join;
Whom Hyrmin, here, and Myrsinus confine,
And bounded there, where o'er the valleys rose
The Olenian rock; and where Alisium flows;
Beneath four chiefs (a numerous army) came:
The strength and glory of the Epean name.
In separate squadrons these their train divide,
Each leads ten vessels through the yielding tide.
One was Amphimachus, and Thalpius one;
(Eurytus' this, and that Teatus' son;)
Diores sprung from Amarynceus' line;
And great Polyxenus, of force divine.

But those who view fair Elis o'er the seas
From the blest islands of the Echinades,
In forty vessels under Meges move,
Begot by Phyleus, the beloved of Jove:
To strong Dulichium from his sire he fled,
And thence to Troy his hardy warriors led.

Ulysses follow'd through the watery road,
A chief, in wisdom equal to a god.
With those whom Cephalenia's line inclosed,
Or till their fields along the coast opposed;
Or where fair Ithaca o'erlooks the floods,
Where high Neritos shakes his waving woods,
Where gilipa's rugged sides are seen,
Crocylia rocky, and Zacynthus green.
These in twelve galleys with vermilion prores,
Beneath his conduct sought the Phrygian shores.

Thoas came next, Andraemon's valiant son,
From Pleuron's walls, and chalky Calydon,
And rough Pylene, and the Olenian steep,
And Chalcis, beaten by the rolling deep.
He led the warriors from the tolian shore,
For now the sons of Oeneus were no more!
The glories of the mighty race were fled!
Oeneus himself, and Meleager dead!
To Thoas' care now trust the martial train,
His forty vessels follow through the main.

Next, eighty barks the Cretan king commands,
Of Gnossus, Lyctus, and Gortyna's bands;
And those who dwell where Rhytion's domes arise,
Or white Lycastus glitters to the skies,
Or where by Phaestus silver Jardan runs;
Crete's hundred cities pour forth all her sons.
These march'd, Idomeneus, beneath thy care,
And Merion, dreadful as the god of war.

Tlepolemus, the sun of Hercules,
Led nine swift vessels through the foamy seas,
From Rhodes, with everlasting sunshine bright,
Jalyssus, Lindus, and Camirus white.
His captive mother fierce Alcides bore
From Ephyr's walls and Selle's winding shore,
Where mighty towns in ruins spread the plain,
And saw their blooming warriors early slain.
The hero, when to manly years he grew,
Alcides' uncle, old Licymnius, slew;
For this, constrain'd to quit his native place,
And shun the vengeance of the Herculean race,
A fleet he built, and with a numerous train
Of willing exiles wander'd o'er the main;
Where, many seas and many sufferings past,
On happy Rhodes the chief arrived at last:
There in three tribes divides his native band,
And rules them peaceful in a foreign land;
Increased and prosper'd in their new abodes
By mighty Jove, the sire of men and gods;
With joy they saw the growing empire rise,
And showers of wealth descending from the skies.

Three ships with Nireus sought the Trojan shore,
Nireus, whom Aglae to Charopus bore,
Nireus, in faultless shape and blooming grace,
The loveliest youth of all the Grecian race;
Pelides only match'd his early charms;
But few his troops, and small his strength in arms.

Next thirty galleys cleave the liquid plain,
Of those Calydnae's sea-girt isles contain;
With them the youth of Nisyrus repair,
Casus the strong, and Crapathus the fair;
Cos, where Eurypylus possess'd the sway,
Till great Alcides made the realms obey:
These Antiphus and bold Phidippus bring,
Sprung from the god by Thessalus the king.

Now, Muse, recount Pelasgic Argos' powers,
From Alos, Alope, and Trechin's towers:
From Phthia's spacious vales; and Hella, bless'd
With female beauty far beyond the rest.
Full fifty ships beneath Achilles' care,
The Achaians, Myrmidons, Hellenians bear;
Thessalians all, though various in their name;
The same their nation, and their chief the same.
But now inglorious, stretch'd along the shore,
They hear the brazen voice of war no more;
No more the foe they face in dire array:
Close in his fleet the angry leader lay;
Since fair Briseis from his arms was torn,
The noblest spoil from sack'd Lyrnessus borne,
Then, when the chief the Theban walls o'erthrew,
And the bold sons of great Evenus slew.
There mourn'd Achilles, plunged in depth of care,
But soon to rise in slaughter, blood, and war.

To these the youth of Phylace succeed,
Itona, famous for her fleecy breed,
And grassy Pteleon deck'd with cheerful greens,
The bowers of Ceres, and the sylvan scenes.
Sweet Pyrrhasus, with blooming flowerets crown'd,
And Antron's watery dens, and cavern'd ground.
These own'd, as chief, Protesilas the brave,
Who now lay silent in the gloomy grave:
The first who boldly touch'd the Trojan shore,
And dyed a Phrygian lance with Grecian gore;
There lies, far distant from his native plain;
Unfinish'd his proud palaces remain,
And his sad consort beats her breast in vain.
His troops in forty ships Podarces led,
Iphiclus' son, and brother to the dead;
Nor he unworthy to command the host;
Yet still they mourn'd their ancient leader lost.

The men who Glaphyra's fair soil partake,
Where hills incircle Boebe's lowly lake,
Where Phaere hears the neighbouring waters fall,
Or proud Iolcus lifts her airy wall,
In ten black ships embark'd for Ilion's shore,
With bold Eumelus, whom Alceste bore:
All Pelias' race Alceste far outshined,
The grace and glory of the beauteous kind,

The troops Methone or Thaumacia yields,
Olizon's rocks, or Meliboea's fields,
With Philoctetes sail'd whose matchless art
From the tough bow directs the feather'd dart.
Seven were his ships; each vessel fifty row,
Skill'd in his science of the dart and bow.
But he lay raging on the Lemnian ground,
A poisonous hydra gave the burning wound;
There groan'd the chief in agonizing pain,
Whom Greece at length shall wish, nor wish in vain.
His forces Medon led from Lemnos' shore,
Oileus' son, whom beauteous Rhena bore.

The Oechalian race, in those high towers contain'd
Where once Eurytus in proud triumph reign'd,
Or where her humbler turrets Tricca rears,
Or where Ithome, rough with rocks, appears,
In thirty sail the sparkling waves divide,
Which Podalirius and Machaon guide.
To these his skill their parent-god imparts,
Divine professors of the healing arts.

The bold Ormenian and Asterian bands
In forty barks Eurypylus commands.
Where Titan hides his hoary head in snow,
And where Hyperia's silver fountains flow.
Thy troops, Argissa, Polypoetes leads,
And Eleon, shelter'd by Olympus' shades,
Gyrtone's warriors; and where Orthe lies,
And Oloosson's chalky cliffs arise.
Sprung from Pirithous of immortal race,
The fruit of fair Hippodame's embrace,
(That day, when hurl'd from Pelion's cloudy head,
To distant dens the shaggy Centaurs fled)
With Polypoetes join'd in equal sway
Leonteus leads, and forty ships obey.

In twenty sail the bold Perrhaebians came
From Cyphus, Guneus was their leader's name.
With these the Enians join'd, and those who freeze
Where cold Dodona lifts her holy trees;
Or where the pleasing Titaresius glides,
And into Peneus rolls his easy tides;
Yet o'er the silvery surface pure they flow,
The sacred stream unmix'd with streams below,
Sacred and awful! from the dark abodes
Styx pours them forth, the dreadful oath of gods!

Last, under Prothous the Magnesians stood,
(Prothous the swift, of old Tenthredon's blood;)
Who dwell where Pelion, crown'd with piny boughs,
Obscures the glade, and nods his shaggy brows;
Or where through flowery Tempe Peneus stray'd:
(The region stretch'd beneath his mighty shade:)
In forty sable barks they stemm'd the main;
Such were the chiefs, and such the Grecian train.

Say next, O Muse! of all Achaia breeds,
Who bravest fought, or rein'd the noblest steeds?
Eumelus' mares were foremost in the chase,
As eagles fleet, and of Pheretian race;
Bred where Pieria's fruitful fountains flow,
And train'd by him who bears the silver bow.
Fierce in the fight their nostrils breathed a flame,
Their height, their colour, and their age the same;
O'er fields of death they whirl the rapid car,
And break the ranks, and thunder through the war.
Ajax in arms the first renown acquired,
While stern Achilles in his wrath retired:
(His was the strength that mortal might exceeds,
And his the unrivall'd race of heavenly steeds:)
But Thetis' son now shines in arms no more;
His troops, neglected on the sandy shore.
In empty air their sportive javelins throw,
Or whirl the disk, or bend an idle bow:
Unstain'd with blood his cover'd chariots stand;
The immortal coursers graze along the strand;
But the brave chiefs the inglorious life deplored,
And, wandering o'er the camp, required their lord.

Now, like a deluge, covering all around,
The shining armies sweep along the ground;
Swift as a flood of fire, when storms arise,
Floats the wild field, and blazes to the skies.
Earth groan'd beneath them; as when angry Jove
Hurls down the forky lightning from above,
On Arime when he the thunder throws,
And fires Typhoeus with redoubled blows,
Where Typhon, press'd beneath the burning load,
Still feels the fury of the avenging god.

But various Iris, Jove's commands to bear,
Speeds on the wings of winds through liquid air;
In Priam's porch the Trojan chiefs she found,
The old consulting, and the youths around.
Polites' shape, the monarch's son, she chose,
Who from setes' tomb observed the foes,
High on the mound; from whence in prospect lay
The fields, the tents, the navy, and the bay.
In this dissembled form, she hastes to bring
The unwelcome message to the Phrygian king.

"Cease to consult, the time for action calls;
War, horrid war, approaches to your walls!
Assembled armies oft have I beheld;
But ne'er till now such numbers charged a field:
Thick as autumnal leaves or driving sand,
The moving squadrons blacken all the strand.
Thou, godlike Hector! all thy force employ,
Assemble all the united bands of Troy;
In just array let every leader call
The foreign troops: this day demands them all!"

The voice divine the mighty chief alarms;
The council breaks, the warriors rush to arms.
The gates unfolding pour forth all their train,
Nations on nations fill the dusky plain,
Men, steeds, and chariots, shake the trembling ground:
The tumult thickens, and the skies resound.

Amidst the plain, in sight of Ilion, stands
A rising mount, the work of human hands;
(This for Myrinne's tomb the immortals know,
Though call'd Bateia in the world below;)
Beneath their chiefs in martial order here,
The auxiliar troops and Trojan hosts appear.

The godlike Hector, high above the rest,
Shakes his huge spear, and nods his plumy crest:
In throngs around his native bands repair,
And groves of lances glitter in the air.

Divine neas brings the Dardan race,
Anchises' son, by Venus' stolen embrace,
Born in the shades of Ida's secret grove;
(A mortal mixing with the queen of love;)
Archilochus and Acamas divide
The warrior's toils, and combat by his side.

Who fair Zeleia's wealthy valleys till,
Fast by the foot of Ida's sacred hill,
Or drink, sepus, of thy sable flood,
Were led by Pandarus, of royal blood;
To whom his art Apollo deign'd to show,
Graced with the presents of his shafts and bow.

From rich Apaesus and Adrestia's towers,
High Teree's summits, and Pityea's bowers;
From these the congregated troops obey
Young Amphius and Adrastus' equal sway;
Old Merops' sons; whom, skill'd in fates to come,
The sire forewarn'd, and prophesied their doom:
Fate urged them on! the sire forewarn'd in vain,
They rush'd to war, and perish'd on the plain.

From Practius' stream, Percote's pasture lands,
And Sestos and Abydos' neighbouring strands,
From great Arisba's walls and Selle's coast,
Asius Hyrtacides conducts his host:
High on his car he shakes the flowing reins,
His fiery coursers thunder o'er the plains.

The fierce Pelasgi next, in war renown'd,
March from Larissa's ever-fertile ground:
In equal arms their brother leaders shine,
Hippothous bold, and Pyleus the divine.

Next Acamas and Pyrous lead their hosts,
In dread array, from Thracia's wintry coasts;
Round the bleak realms where Hellespontus roars,
And Boreas beats the hoarse-resounding shores.

With great Euphemus the Ciconians move,
Sprung from Troezenian Ceus, loved by Jove.

Pyraechmes the Paeonian troops attend,
Skill'd in the fight their crooked bows to bend;
From Axius' ample bed he leads them on,
Axius, that laves the distant Amydon,
Axius, that swells with all his neighbouring rills,
And wide around the floating region fills.

The Paphlagonians Pylaemenes rules,
Where rich Henetia breeds her savage mules,
Where Erythinus' rising cliffs are seen,
Thy groves of box, Cytorus! ever green,
And where gialus and Cromna lie,
And lofty Sesamus invades the sky,
And where Parthenius, roll'd through banks of flowers,
Reflects her bordering palaces and bowers.

Here march'd in arms the Halizonian band,
Whom Odius and Epistrophus command,
From those far regions where the sun refines
The ripening silver in Alybean mines.

There mighty Chromis led the Mysian train,
And augur Ennomus, inspired in vain;
For stern Achilles lopp'd his sacred head,
Roll'd down Scamander with the vulgar dead.

Phorcys and brave Ascanius here unite
The Ascanian Phrygians, eager for the fight.

Of those who round Maeonia's realms reside,
Or whom the vales in shades of Tmolus hide,
Mestles and Antiphus the charge partake,
Born on the banks of Gyges' silent lake.
There, from the fields where wild Maeander flows,
High Mycale, and Latmos' shady brows,
And proud Miletus, came the Carian throngs,
With mingled clamours and with barbarous tongues.
Amphimachus and Naustes guide the train,
Naustes the bold, Amphimachus the vain,
Who, trick'd with gold, and glittering on his car,
Rode like a woman to the field of war.
Fool that he was! by fierce Achilles slain,
The river swept him to the briny main:
There whelm'd with waves the gaudy warrior lies
The valiant victor seized the golden prize.

The forces last in fair array succeed,
Which blameless Glaucus and Sarpedon lead
The warlike bands that distant Lycia yields,
Where gulfy Xanthus foams along the fields.

Thus by their leaders' care each martial band
Moves into ranks, and stretches o'er the land.
With shouts the Trojans, rushing from afar,
Proclaim their motions, and provoke the war
So when inclement winters vex the plain
With piercing frosts, or thick-descending rain,
To warmer seas the cranes embodied fly,
With noise, and order, through the midway sky;
To pigmy nations wounds and death they bring,
And all the war descends upon the wing,
But silent, breathing rage, resolved and skill'd
By mutual aids to fix a doubtful field,
Swift march the Greeks: the rapid dust around
Darkening arises from the labour'd ground.
Thus from his flaggy wings when Notus sheds
A night of vapours round the mountain heads,
Swift-gliding mists the dusky fields invade,
To thieves more grateful than the midnight shade;
While scarce the swains their feeding flocks survey,
Lost and confused amidst the thicken'd day:
So wrapp'd in gathering dust, the Grecian train,
A moving cloud, swept on, and hid the plain.

Now front to front the hostile armies stand,
Eager of fight, and only wait command;
When, to the van, before the sons of fame
Whom Troy sent forth, the beauteous Paris came:
In form a god! the panther's speckled hide
Flow'd o'er his armour with an easy pride:
His bended bow across his shoulders flung,
His sword beside him negligently hung;
Two pointed spears he shook with gallant grace,
And dared the bravest of the Grecian race.

As thus, with glorious air and proud disdain,
He boldly stalk'd, the foremost on the plain,
Him Menelaus, loved of Mars, espies,
With heart elated, and with joyful eyes:
So joys a lion, if the branching deer,
Or mountain goat, his bulky prize, appear;
Eager he seizes and devours the slain,
Press'd by bold youths and baying dogs in vain.
Thus fond of vengeance, with a furious bound,
In clanging arms he leaps upon the ground
From his high chariot: him, approaching near,
The beauteous champion views with marks of fear,
Smit with a conscious sense, retires behind,
And shuns the fate he well deserved to find.
As when some shepherd, from the rustling trees
Shot forth to view, a scaly serpent sees,
Trembling and pale, he starts with wild affright
And all confused precipitates his flight:
So from the king the shining warrior flies,
And plunged amid the thickest Trojans lies.

As godlike Hector sees the prince retreat,
He thus upbraids him with a generous heat:
"Unhappy Paris! but to women brave!
So fairly form'd, and only to deceive!
Oh, hadst thou died when first thou saw'st the light,
Or died at least before thy nuptial rite!
A better fate than vainly thus to boast,
And fly, the scandal of thy Trojan host.
Gods! how the scornful Greeks exult to see
Their fears of danger undeceived in thee!
Thy figure promised with a martial air,
But ill thy soul supplies a form so fair.
In former days, in all thy gallant pride,
When thy tall ships triumphant stemm'd the tide,
When Greece beheld thy painted canvas flow,
And crowds stood wondering at the passing show,
Say, was it thus, with such a baffled mien,
You met the approaches of the Spartan queen,
Thus from her realm convey'd the beauteous prize,
And both her warlike lords outshined in Helen's eyes?
This deed, thy foes' delight, thy own disgrace,
Thy father's grief, and ruin of thy race;
This deed recalls thee to the proffer'd fight;
Or hast thou injured whom thou dar'st not right?
Soon to thy cost the field would make thee know
Thou keep'st the consort of a braver foe.
Thy graceful form instilling soft desire,
Thy curling tresses, and thy silver lyre,
Beauty and youth; in vain to these you trust,
When youth and beauty shall be laid in dust:
Troy yet may wake, and one avenging blow
Crush the dire author of his country's woe."

His silence here, with blushes, Paris breaks:
"'Tis just, my brother, what your anger speaks:
But who like thee can boast a soul sedate,
So firmly proof to all the shocks of fate?
Thy force, like steel, a temper'd hardness shows,
Still edged to wound, and still untired with blows,
Like steel, uplifted by some strenuous swain,
With falling woods to strew the wasted plain.
Thy gifts I praise; nor thou despise the charms
With which a lover golden Venus arms;
Soft moving speech, and pleasing outward show,
No wish can gain them, but the gods bestow.
Yet, would'st thou have the proffer'd combat stand,
The Greeks and Trojans seat on either hand;
Then let a midway space our hosts divide,
And, on that stage of war, the cause be tried:
By Paris there the Spartan king be fought,
For beauteous Helen and the wealth she brought;
And who his rival can in arms subdue,
His be the fair, and his the treasure too.
Thus with a lasting league your toils may cease,
And Troy possess her fertile fields in peace;
Thus may the Greeks review their native shore,
Much famed for generous steeds, for beauty more."

He said. The challenge Hector heard with joy,
Then with his spear restrain'd the youth of Troy,
Held by the midst, athwart; and near the foe
Advanced with steps majestically slow:
While round his dauntless head the Grecians pour
Their stones and arrows in a mingled shower.

Then thus the monarch, great Atrides, cried:
"Forbear, ye warriors! lay the darts aside:
A parley Hector asks, a message bears;
We know him by the various plume he wears."
Awed by his high command the Greeks attend,
The tumult silence, and the fight suspend.

While from the centre Hector rolls his eyes
On either host, and thus to both applies:
"Hear, all ye Trojan, all ye Grecian bands,
What Paris, author of the war, demands.
Your shining swords within the sheath restrain,
And pitch your lances in the yielding plain.
Here in the midst, in either army's sight,
He dares the Spartan king to single fight;
And wills that Helen and the ravish'd spoil,
That caused the contest, shall reward the toil.
Let these the brave triumphant victor grace,
And different nations part in leagues of peace."

He spoke: in still suspense on either side
Each army stood: the Spartan chief replied:

"Me too, ye warriors, hear, whose fatal right
A world engages in the toils of fight.
To me the labour of the field resign;
Me Paris injured; all the war be mine.
Fall he that must, beneath his rival's arms;
And live the rest, secure of future harms.
Two lambs, devoted by your country's rite,
To earth a sable, to the sun a white,
Prepare, ye Trojans! while a third we bring
Select to Jove, the inviolable king.
Let reverend Priam in the truce engage,
And add the sanction of considerate age;
His sons are faithless, headlong in debate,
And youth itself an empty wavering state;
Cool age advances, venerably wise,
Turns on all hands its deep-discerning eyes;
Sees what befell, and what may yet befall,
Concludes from both, and best provides for all.

The nations hear with rising hopes possess'd,
And peaceful prospects dawn in every breast.
Within the lines they drew their steeds around,
And from their chariots issued on the ground;
Next, all unbuckling the rich mail they wore,
Laid their bright arms along the sable shore.
On either side the meeting hosts are seen
With lances fix'd, and close the space between.
Two heralds now, despatch'd to Troy, invite
The Phrygian monarch to the peaceful rite.

Talthybius hastens to the fleet, to bring
The lamb for Jove, the inviolable king.

Meantime to beauteous Helen, from the skies
The various goddess of the rainbow flies:
(Like fair Laodice in form and face,
The loveliest nymph of Priam's royal race:)
Her in the palace, at her loom she found;
The golden web her own sad story crown'd,
The Trojan wars she weaved (herself the prize)
And the dire triumphs of her fatal eyes.
To whom the goddess of the painted bow:
"Approach, and view the wondrous scene below!
Each hardy Greek, and valiant Trojan knight,
So dreadful late, and furious for the fight,
Now rest their spears, or lean upon their shields;
Ceased is the war, and silent all the fields.
Paris alone and Sparta's king advance,
In single fight to toss the beamy lance;
Each met in arms, the fate of combat tries,
Thy love the motive, and thy charms the prize."

This said, the many-coloured maid inspires
Her husband's love, and wakes her former fires;
Her country, parents, all that once were dear,
Rush to her thought, and force a tender tear,
O'er her fair face a snowy veil she threw,
And, softly sighing, from the loom withdrew.
Her handmaids, Clymene and thra, wait
Her silent footsteps to the Scaean gate.

There sat the seniors of the Trojan race:
(Old Priam's chiefs, and most in Priam's grace,)
The king the first; Thymoetes at his side;
Lampus and Clytius, long in council tried;
Panthus, and Hicetaon, once the strong;
And next, the wisest of the reverend throng,
Antenor grave, and sage Ucalegon,
Lean'd on the walls and bask'd before the sun:
Chiefs, who no more in bloody fights engage,
But wise through time, and narrative with age,
In summer days, like grasshoppers rejoice,
A bloodless race, that send a feeble voice.
These, when the Spartan queen approach'd the tower,
In secret own'd resistless beauty's power:
They cried, "No wonder such celestial charms
For nine long years have set the world in arms;
What winning graces! what majestic mien!
She moves a goddess, and she looks a queen!
Yet hence, O Heaven, convey that fatal face,
And from destruction save the Trojan race."

The good old Priam welcomed her, and cried,
"Approach, my child, and grace thy father's side.
See on the plain thy Grecian spouse appears,
The friends and kindred of thy former years.
No crime of thine our present sufferings draws,
Not thou, but Heaven's disposing will, the cause
The gods these armies and this force employ,
The hostile gods conspire the fate of Troy.
But lift thy eyes, and say, what Greek is he
(Far as from hence these aged orbs can see)
Around whose brow such martial graces shine,
So tall, so awful, and almost divine!
Though some of larger stature tread the green,
None match his grandeur and exalted mien:
He seems a monarch, and his country's pride."
Thus ceased the king, and thus the fair replied:

"Before thy presence, father, I appear,
With conscious shame and reverential fear.
Ah! had I died, ere to these walk I fled,
False to my country, and my nuptial bed;
My brothers, friends, and daughter left behind,
False to them all, to Paris only kind!
For this I mourn, till grief or dire disease
Shall waste the form whose fault it was to please!
The king of kings, Atrides, you survey,
Great in the war, and great in arts of sway:
My brother once, before my days of shame!
And oh! that still he bore a brother's name!"

With wonder Priam view'd the godlike man,
Extoll'd the happy prince, and thus began:
"O bless'd Atrides! born to prosperous fate,
Successful monarch of a mighty state!
How vast thy empire! Of your matchless train
What numbers lost, what numbers yet remain!
In Phrygia once were gallant armies known,
In ancient time, when Otreus fill'd the throne,
When godlike Mygdon led their troops of horse,
And I, to join them, raised the Trojan force:
Against the manlike Amazons we stood,
And Sangar's stream ran purple with their blood.
But far inferior those, in martial grace,
And strength of numbers, to this Grecian race."

This said, once more he view'd the warrior train;
"What's he, whose arms lie scatter'd on the plain?
Broad is his breast, his shoulders larger spread,
Though great Atrides overtops his head.
Nor yet appear his care and conduct small;
From rank to rank he moves, and orders all.
The stately ram thus measures o'er the ground,
And, master of the flock, surveys them round."

Then Helen thus: "Whom your discerning eyes
Have singled out, is Ithacus the wise;
A barren island boasts his glorious birth;
His fame for wisdom fills the spacious earth."

Antenor took the word, and thus began:
"Myself, O king! have seen that wondrous man
When, trusting Jove and hospitable laws,
To Troy he came, to plead the Grecian cause;
(Great Menelaus urged the same request;)
My house was honour'd with each royal guest:
I knew their persons, and admired their parts,
Both brave in arms, and both approved in arts.
Erect, the Spartan most engaged our view;
Ulysses seated, greater reverence drew.
When Atreus' son harangued the listening train,
Just was his sense, and his expression plain,
His words succinct, yet full, without a fault;
He spoke no more than just the thing he ought.
But when Ulysses rose, in thought profound,
His modest eyes he fix'd upon the ground;
As one unskill'd or dumb, he seem'd to stand,
Nor raised his head, nor stretch'd his sceptred hand;
But, when he speaks, what elocution flows!
Soft as the fleeces of descending snows,
The copious accents fall, with easy art;
Melting they fall, and sink into the heart!
Wondering we hear, and fix'd in deep surprise,
Our ears refute the censure of our eyes."

The king then ask'd (as yet the camp he view'd)
"What chief is that, with giant strength endued,
Whose brawny shoulders, and whose swelling chest,
And lofty stature, far exceed the rest?
"Ajax the great, (the beauteous queen replied,)
Himself a host: the Grecian strength and pride.
See! bold Idomeneus superior towers
Amid yon circle of his Cretan powers,
Great as a god! I saw him once before,
With Menelaus on the Spartan shore.
The rest I know, and could in order name;
All valiant chiefs, and men of mighty fame.
Yet two are wanting of the numerous train,
Whom long my eyes have sought, but sought in vain:
Castor and Pollux, first in martial force,
One bold on foot, and one renown'd for horse.
My brothers these; the same our native shore,
One house contain'd us, as one mother bore.
Perhaps the chiefs, from warlike toils at ease,
For distant Troy refused to sail the seas;
Perhaps their swords some nobler quarrel draws,
Ashamed to combat in their sister's cause."

So spoke the fair, nor knew her brothers' doom;
Wrapt in the cold embraces of the tomb;
Adorn'd with honours in their native shore,
Silent they slept, and heard of wars no more.

Meantime the heralds, through the crowded town.
Bring the rich wine and destined victims down.
Idaeus' arms the golden goblets press'd,
Who thus the venerable king address'd:
"Arise, O father of the Trojan state!
The nations call, thy joyful people wait
To seal the truce, and end the dire debate.
Paris, thy son, and Sparta's king advance,
In measured lists to toss the weighty lance;
And who his rival shall in arms subdue,
His be the dame, and his the treasure too.
Thus with a lasting league our toils may cease,
And Troy possess her fertile fields in peace:
So shall the Greeks review their native shore,
Much famed for generous steeds, for beauty more."

With grief he heard, and bade the chiefs prepare
To join his milk-white coursers to the car;
He mounts the seat, Antenor at his side;
The gentle steeds through Scaea's gates they guide:
Next from the car descending on the plain,
Amid the Grecian host and Trojan train,
Slow they proceed: the sage Ulysses then
Arose, and with him rose the king of men.
On either side a sacred herald stands,
The wine they mix, and on each monarch's hands
Pour the full urn; then draws the Grecian lord
His cutlass sheathed beside his ponderous sword;
From the sign'd victims crops the curling hair;
The heralds part it, and the princes share;
Then loudly thus before the attentive bands
He calls the gods, and spreads his lifted hands:

"O first and greatest power! whom all obey,
Who high on Ida's holy mountain sway,
Eternal Jove! and you bright orb that roll
From east to west, and view from pole to pole!
Thou mother Earth! and all ye living floods!
Infernal furies, and Tartarean gods,
Who rule the dead, and horrid woes prepare
For perjured kings, and all who falsely swear!
Hear, and be witness. If, by Paris slain,
Great Menelaus press the fatal plain;
The dame and treasures let the Trojan keep,
And Greece returning plough the watery deep.
If by my brother's lance the Trojan bleed,
Be his the wealth and beauteous dame decreed:
The appointed fine let Ilion justly pay,
And every age record the signal day.
This if the Phrygians shall refuse to yield,
Arms must revenge, and Mars decide the field."

With that the chief the tender victims slew,
And in the dust their bleeding bodies threw;
The vital spirit issued at the wound,
And left the members quivering on the ground.
From the same urn they drink the mingled wine,
And add libations to the powers divine.
While thus their prayers united mount the sky,
"Hear, mighty Jove! and hear, ye gods on high!
And may their blood, who first the league confound,
Shed like this wine, disdain the thirsty ground;
May all their consorts serve promiscuous lust,
And all their lust be scatter'd as the dust!"
Thus either host their imprecations join'd,
Which Jove refused, and mingled with the wind.

The rites now finish'd, reverend Priam rose,
And thus express'd a heart o'ercharged with woes:
"Ye Greeks and Trojans, let the chiefs engage,
But spare the weakness of my feeble age:
In yonder walls that object let me shun,
Nor view the danger of so dear a son.
Whose arms shall conquer and what prince shall fall,
Heaven only knows; for heaven disposes all."

This said, the hoary king no longer stay'd,
But on his car the slaughter'd victims laid:
Then seized the reins his gentle steeds to guide,
And drove to Troy, Antenor at his side.

Bold Hector and Ulysses now dispose
The lists of combat, and the ground inclose:
Next to decide, by sacred lots prepare,
Who first shall launch his pointed spear in air.
The people pray with elevated hands,
And words like these are heard through all the bands:
"Immortal Jove, high Heaven's superior lord,
On lofty Ida's holy mount adored!
Whoe'er involved us in this dire debate,
O give that author of the war to fate
And shades eternal! let division cease,
And joyful nations join in leagues of peace."

With eyes averted Hector hastes to turn
The lots of fight and shakes the brazen urn.
Then, Paris, thine leap'd forth; by fatal chance
Ordain'd the first to whirl the weighty lance.
Both armies sat the combat to survey.
Beside each chief his azure armour lay,
And round the lists the generous coursers neigh.
The beauteous warrior now arrays for fight,
In gilded arms magnificently bright:
The purple cuishes clasp his thighs around,
With flowers adorn'd, with silver buckles bound:
Lycaon's corslet his fair body dress'd,
Braced in and fitted to his softer breast;
A radiant baldric, o'er his shoulder tied,
Sustain'd the sword that glitter'd at his side:
His youthful face a polish'd helm o'erspread;
The waving horse-hair nodded on his head:
His figured shield, a shining orb, he takes,
And in his hand a pointed javelin shakes.
With equal speed and fired by equal charms,
The Spartan hero sheathes his limbs in arms.

Now round the lists the admiring armies stand,
With javelins fix'd, the Greek and Trojan band.
Amidst the dreadful vale, the chiefs advance,
All pale with rage, and shake the threatening lance.
The Trojan first his shining javelin threw;
Full on Atrides' ringing shield it flew,
Nor pierced the brazen orb, but with a bound
Leap'd from the buckler, blunted, on the ground.
Atrides then his massy lance prepares,
In act to throw, but first prefers his prayers:

"Give me, great Jove! to punish lawless lust,
And lay the Trojan gasping in the dust:
Destroy the aggressor, aid my righteous cause,
Avenge the breach of hospitable laws!
Let this example future times reclaim,
And guard from wrong fair friendship's holy name."
Be said, and poised in air the javelin sent,
Through Paris' shield the forceful weapon went,
His corslet pierces, and his garment rends,
And glancing downward, near his flank descends.
The wary Trojan, bending from the blow,
Eludes the death, and disappoints his foe:
But fierce Atrides waved his sword, and strook
Full on his casque: the crested helmet shook;
The brittle steel, unfaithful to his hand,
Broke short: the fragments glitter'd on the sand.
The raging warrior to the spacious skies
Raised his upbraiding voice and angry eyes:
"Then is it vain in Jove himself to trust?
And is it thus the gods assist the just?
When crimes provoke us, Heaven success denies;
The dart falls harmless, and the falchion flies."
Furious he said, and towards the Grecian crew
(Seized by the crest) the unhappy warrior drew;
Struggling he followed, while the embroider'd thong
That tied his helmet, dragg'd the chief along.
Then had his ruin crown'd Atrides' joy,
But Venus trembled for the prince of Troy:
Unseen she came, and burst the golden band;
And left an empty helmet in his hand.
The casque, enraged, amidst the Greeks he threw;
The Greeks with smiles the polish'd trophy view.
Then, as once more he lifts the deadly dart,
In thirst of vengeance, at his rival's heart;
The queen of love her favour'd champion shrouds
(For gods can all things) in a veil of clouds.
Raised from the field the panting youth she led,
And gently laid him on the bridal bed,
With pleasing sweets his fainting sense renews,
And all the dome perfumes with heavenly dews.
Meantime the brightest of the female kind,
The matchless Helen, o'er the walls reclined;
To her, beset with Trojan beauties, came,
In borrow'd form, the laughter-loving dame.
(She seem'd an ancient maid, well-skill'd to cull
The snowy fleece, and wind the twisted wool.)
The goddess softly shook her silken vest,
That shed perfumes, and whispering thus address'd:

"Haste, happy nymph! for thee thy Paris calls,
Safe from the fight, in yonder lofty walls,
Fair as a god; with odours round him spread,
He lies, and waits thee on the well-known bed;
Not like a warrior parted from the foe,
But some gay dancer in the public show."

She spoke, and Helen's secret soul was moved;
She scorn'd the champion, but the man she loved.
Fair Venus' neck, her eyes that sparkled fire,
And breast, reveal'd the queen of soft desire.
Struck with her presence, straight the lively red
Forsook her cheek; and trembling, thus she said:
"Then is it still thy pleasure to deceive?
And woman's frailty always to believe!
Say, to new nations must I cross the main,
Or carry wars to some soft Asian plain?
For whom must Helen break her second vow?
What other Paris is thy darling now?
Left to Atrides, (victor in the strife,)
An odious conquest and a captive wife,
Hence let me sail; and if thy Paris bear
My absence ill, let Venus ease his care.
A handmaid goddess at his side to wait,
Renounce the glories of thy heavenly state,
Be fix'd for ever to the Trojan shore,
His spouse, or slave; and mount the skies no more.
For me, to lawless love no longer led,
I scorn the coward, and detest his bed;
Else should I merit everlasting shame,
And keen reproach, from every Phrygian dame:
Ill suits it now the joys of love to know,
Too deep my anguish, and too wild my woe."

Then thus incensed, the Paphian queen replies:
"Obey the power from whom thy glories rise:
Should Venus leave thee, every charm must fly,
Fade from thy cheek, and languish in thy eye.
Cease to provoke me, lest I make thee more
The world's aversion, than their love before;
Now the bright prize for which mankind engage,
Than, the sad victim, of the public rage."

At this, the fairest of her sex obey'd,
And veil'd her blushes in a silken shade;
Unseen, and silent, from the train she moves,
Led by the goddess of the Smiles and Loves.
Arrived, and enter'd at the palace gate,
The maids officious round their mistress wait;
Then, all dispersing, various tasks attend;
The queen and goddess to the prince ascend.
Full in her Paris' sight, the queen of love
Had placed the beauteous progeny of Jove;
Where, as he view'd her charms, she turn'd away
Her glowing eyes, and thus began to say:

"Is this the chief, who, lost to sense of shame,
Late fled the field, and yet survives his fame?
O hadst thou died beneath the righteous sword
Of that brave man whom once I call'd my lord!
The boaster Paris oft desired the day
With Sparta's king to meet in single fray:
Go now, once more thy rival's rage excite,
Provoke Atrides, and renew the fight:
Yet Helen bids thee stay, lest thou unskill'd
Shouldst fall an easy conquest on the field."

The prince replies: "Ah cease, divinely fair,
Nor add reproaches to the wounds I bear;
This day the foe prevail'd by Pallas' power:
We yet may vanquish in a happier hour:
There want not gods to favour us above;
But let the business of our life be love:
These softer moments let delights employ,
And kind embraces snatch the hasty joy.
Not thus I loved thee, when from Sparta's shore
My forced, my willing heavenly prize I bore,
When first entranced in Cranae's isle I lay,
Mix'd with thy soul, and all dissolved away!"
Thus having spoke, the enamour'd Phrygian boy
Rush'd to the bed, impatient for the joy.
Him Helen follow'd slow with bashful charms,
And clasp'd the blooming hero in her arms.

While these to love's delicious rapture yield,
The stern Atrides rages round the field:
So some fell lion whom the woods obey,
Roars through the desert, and demands his prey.
Paris he seeks, impatient to destroy,
But seeks in vain along the troops of Troy;
Even those had yielded to a foe so brave
The recreant warrior, hateful as the grave.
Then speaking thus, the king of kings arose,
"Ye Trojans, Dardans, all our generous foes!
Hear and attest! from Heaven with conquest crown'd,
Our brother's arms the just success have found:
Be therefore now the Spartan wealth restor'd,
Let Argive Helen own her lawful lord;
The appointed fine let Ilion justly pay,
And age to age record this signal day."

He ceased; his army's loud applauses rise,
And the long shout runs echoing through the skies.

And now Olympus' shining gates unfold;
The gods, with Jove, assume their thrones of gold:
Immortal Hebe, fresh with bloom divine,
The golden goblet crowns with purple wine:
While the full bowls flow round, the powers employ
Their careful eyes on long-contended Troy.

When Jove, disposed to tempt Saturnia's spleen,
Thus waked the fury of his partial queen,
"Two powers divine the son of Atreus aid,
Imperial Juno, and the martial maid;
But high in heaven they sit, and gaze from far,
The tame spectators of his deeds of war.
Not thus fair Venus helps her favour'd knight,
The queen of pleasures shares the toils of fight,
Each danger wards, and constant in her care,
Saves in the moment of the last despair.
Her act has rescued Paris' forfeit life,
Though great Atrides gain'd the glorious strife.
Then say, ye powers! what signal issue waits
To crown this deed, and finish all the fates!
Shall Heaven by peace the bleeding kingdoms spare,
Or rouse the furies, and awake the war?
Yet, would the gods for human good provide,
Atrides soon might gain his beauteous bride,
Still Priam's walls in peaceful honours grow,
And through his gates the crowding nations flow."

Thus while he spoke, the queen of heaven, enraged,
And queen of war, in close consult engaged:
Apart they sit, their deep designs employ,
And meditate the future woes of Troy.
Though secret anger swell'd Minerva's breast,
The prudent goddess yet her wrath suppress'd;
But Juno, impotent of passion, broke
Her sullen silence, and with fury spoke:

"Shall then, O tyrant of the ethereal reign!
My schemes, my labours, and my hopes be vain?
Have I, for this, shook Ilion with alarms,
Assembled nations, set two worlds in arms?
To spread the war, I flew from shore to shore;
The immortal coursers scarce the labour bore.
At length ripe vengeance o'er their heads impends,
But Jove himself the faithless race defends.
Loth as thou art to punish lawless lust,
Not all the gods are partial and unjust."

The sire whose thunder shakes the cloudy skies,
Sighs from his inmost soul, and thus replies:
"Oh lasting rancour! oh insatiate hate
To Phrygia's monarch, and the Phrygian state!
What high offence has fired the wife of Jove?
Can wretched mortals harm the powers above,
That Troy, and Troy's whole race thou wouldst confound,
And yon fair structures level with the ground!
Haste, leave the skies, fulfil thy stern desire,
Burst all her gates, and wrap her walls in fire!
Let Priam bleed! if yet you thirst for more,
Bleed all his sons, and Ilion float with gore:
To boundless vengeance the wide realm be given,
Till vast destruction glut the queen of heaven!
So let it be, and Jove his peace enjoy,
When heaven no longer hears the name of Troy.
But should this arm prepare to wreak our hate
On thy loved realms, whose guilt demands their fate;
Presume not thou the lifted bolt to stay,
Remember Troy, and give the vengeance way.
For know, of all the numerous towns that rise
Beneath the rolling sun and starry skies,
Which gods have raised, or earth-born men enjoy,
None stands so dear to Jove as sacred Troy.
No mortals merit more distinguish'd grace
Than godlike Priam, or than Priam's race.
Still to our name their hecatombs expire,
And altars blaze with unextinguish'd fire."

At this the goddess rolled her radiant eyes,
Then on the Thunderer fix'd them, and replies:
"Three towns are Juno's on the Grecian plains,
More dear than all the extended earth contains,
Mycenae, Argos, and the Spartan wall;

These thou mayst raze, nor I forbid their fall:
'Tis not in me the vengeance to remove;
The crime's sufficient that they share my love.
Of power superior why should I complain?
Resent I may, but must resent in vain.
Yet some distinction Juno might require,
Sprung with thyself from one celestial sire,
A goddess born, to share the realms above,
And styled the consort of the thundering Jove;
Nor thou a wife and sister's right deny;
Let both consent, and both by terms comply;
So shall the gods our joint decrees obey,
And heaven shall act as we direct the way.
See ready Pallas waits thy high commands
To raise in arms the Greek and Phrygian bands;
Their sudden friendship by her arts may cease,
And the proud Trojans first infringe the peace."

The sire of men and monarch of the sky
The advice approved, and bade Minerva fly,
Dissolve the league, and all her arts employ
To make the breach the faithless act of Troy.
Fired with the charge, she headlong urged her flight,
And shot like lightning from Olympus' height.
As the red comet, from Saturnius sent
To fright the nations with a dire portent,
(A fatal sign to armies on the plain,
Or trembling sailors on the wintry main,)
With sweeping glories glides along in air,
And shakes the sparkles from its blazing hair:
Between both armies thus, in open sight
Shot the bright goddess in a trail of light,
With eyes erect the gazing hosts admire
The power descending, and the heavens on fire!
"The gods (they cried), the gods this signal sent,
And fate now labours with some vast event:
Jove seals the league, or bloodier scenes prepares;
Jove, the great arbiter of peace and wars."

They said, while Pallas through the Trojan throng,
(In shape a mortal,) pass'd disguised along.
Like bold Laodocus, her course she bent,
Who from Antenor traced his high descent.
Amidst the ranks Lycaon's son she found,
The warlike Pandarus, for strength renown'd;
Whose squadrons, led from black sepus' flood,
With flaming shields in martial circle stood.
To him the goddess: "Phrygian! canst thou hear
A well-timed counsel with a willing ear?
What praise were thine, couldst thou direct thy dart,
Amidst his triumph, to the Spartan's heart?
What gifts from Troy, from Paris wouldst thou gain,
Thy country's foe, the Grecian glory slain?
Then seize the occasion, dare the mighty deed,
Aim at his breast, and may that aim succeed!
But first, to speed the shaft, address thy vow
To Lycian Phoebus with the silver bow,
And swear the firstlings of thy flock to pay,
On Zelia's altars, to the god of day."

He heard, and madly at the motion pleased,
His polish'd bow with hasty rashness seized.
'Twas form'd of horn, and smooth'd with artful toil:
A mountain goat resign'd the shining spoil.
Who pierced long since beneath his arrows bled;
The stately quarry on the cliffs lay dead,
And sixteen palms his brow's large honours spread:
The workmen join'd, and shaped the bended horns,
And beaten gold each taper point adorns.
This, by the Greeks unseen, the warrior bends,
Screen'd by the shields of his surrounding friends:
There meditates the mark; and couching low,
Fits the sharp arrow to the well-strung bow.
One from a hundred feather'd deaths he chose,
Fated to wound, and cause of future woes;
Then offers vows with hecatombs to crown
Apollo's altars in his native town.

Now with full force the yielding horn he bends,
Drawn to an arch, and joins the doubling ends;
Close to his breast he strains the nerve below,
Till the barb'd points approach the circling bow;
The impatient weapon whizzes on the wing;
Sounds the tough horn, and twangs the quivering string.

But thee, Atrides! in that dangerous hour
The gods forget not, nor thy guardian power,
Pallas assists, and (weakened in its force)
Diverts the weapon from its destined course:
So from her babe, when slumber seals his eye,
The watchful mother wafts the envenom'd fly.
Just where his belt with golden buckles join'd,
Where linen folds the double corslet lined,
She turn'd the shaft, which, hissing from above,
Pass'd the broad belt, and through the corslet drove;
The folds it pierced, the plaited linen tore,
And razed the skin, and drew the purple gore.
As when some stately trappings are decreed
To grace a monarch on his bounding steed,
A nymph in Caria or Maeonia bred,
Stains the pure ivory with a lively red;
With equal lustre various colours vie,
The shining whiteness, and the Tyrian dye:
So great Atrides! show'd thy sacred blood,
As down thy snowy thigh distill'd the streaming flood.
With horror seized, the king of men descried
The shaft infix'd, and saw the gushing tide:
Nor less the Spartan fear'd, before he found
The shining barb appear above the wound,
Then, with a sigh, that heaved his manly breast,
The royal brother thus his grief express'd,
And grasp'd his hand; while all the Greeks around
With answering sighs return'd the plaintive sound.

"Oh, dear as life! did I for this agree
The solemn truce, a fatal truce to thee!
Wert thou exposed to all the hostile train,
To fight for Greece, and conquer, to be slain!
The race of Trojans in thy ruin join,
And faith is scorn'd by all the perjured line.
Not thus our vows, confirm'd with wine and gore,
Those hands we plighted, and those oaths we swore,
Shall all be vain: when Heaven's revenge is slow,
Jove but prepares to strike the fiercer blow.
The day shall come, that great avenging day,
When Troy's proud glories in the dust shall lay,
When Priam's powers and Priam's self shall fall,
And one prodigious ruin swallow all.
I see the god, already, from the pole
Bare his red arm, and bid the thunder roll;
I see the Eternal all his fury shed,
And shake his aegis o'er their guilty head.
Such mighty woes on perjured princes wait;
But thou, alas! deserv'st a happier fate.
Still must I mourn the period of thy days,
And only mourn, without my share of praise?
Deprived of thee, the heartless Greeks no more
Shall dream of conquests on the hostile shore;
Troy seized of Helen, and our glory lost,
Thy bones shall moulder on a foreign coast;
While some proud Trojan thus insulting cries,
(And spurns the dust where Menelaus lies,)
'Such are the trophies Greece from Ilion brings,
And such the conquest of her king of kings!
Lo his proud vessels scatter'd o'er the main,
And unrevenged, his mighty brother slain.'
Oh! ere that dire disgrace shall blast my fame,
O'erwhelm me, earth! and hide a monarch's shame."

He said: a leader's and a brother's fears
Possess his soul, which thus the Spartan cheers:
"Let not thy words the warmth of Greece abate;
The feeble dart is guiltless of my fate:
Stiff with the rich embroider'd work around,
My varied belt repell'd the flying wound."

To whom the king: "My brother and my friend,
Thus, always thus, may Heaven thy life defend!
Now seek some skilful hand, whose powerful art
May stanch the effusion, and extract the dart.
Herald, be swift, and bid Machaon bring
His speedy succour to the Spartan king;
Pierced with a winged shaft (the deed of Troy),
The Grecian's sorrow, and the Dardan's joy."

With hasty zeal the swift Talthybius flies;
Through the thick files he darts his searching eyes,
And finds Machaon, where sublime he stands
In arms incircled with his native bands.
Then thus: "Machaon, to the king repair,
His wounded brother claims thy timely care;
Pierced by some Lycian or Dardanian bow,
A grief to us, a triumph to the foe."

The heavy tidings grieved the godlike man
Swift to his succour through the ranks he ran.
The dauntless king yet standing firm he found,
And all the chiefs in deep concern around.
Where to the steely point the reed was join'd,
The shaft he drew, but left the head behind.
Straight the broad belt with gay embroidery graced,
He loosed; the corslet from his breast unbraced;
Then suck'd the blood, and sovereign balm infused,
Which Chiron gave, and sculapius used.

While round the prince the Greeks employ their care,
The Trojans rush tumultuous to the war;
Once more they glitter in refulgent arms,
Once more the fields are fill'd with dire alarms.
Nor had you seen the king of men appear
Confused, unactive, or surprised with fear;
But fond of glory, with severe delight,
His beating bosom claim'd the rising fight.
No longer with his warlike steeds he stay'd,
Or press'd the car with polish'd brass inlaid
But left Eurymedon the reins to guide;
The fiery coursers snorted at his side.
On foot through all the martial ranks he moves
And these encourages, and those reproves.
"Brave men!" he cries, (to such who boldly dare
Urge their swift steeds to face the coming war),
"Your ancient valour on the foes approve;
Jove is with Greece, and let us trust in Jove.
'Tis not for us, but guilty Troy, to dread,
Whose crimes sit heavy on her perjured head;
Her sons and matrons Greece shall lead in chains,
And her dead warriors strew the mournful plains."

Thus with new ardour he the brave inspires;
Or thus the fearful with reproaches fires:
"Shame to your country, scandal of your kind;
Born to the fate ye well deserve to find!
Why stand ye gazing round the dreadful plain,
Prepared for flight, but doom'd to fly in vain?
Confused and panting thus, the hunted deer
Falls as he flies, a victim to his fear.
Still must ye wait the foes, and still retire,
Till yon tall vessels blaze with Trojan fire?
Or trust ye, Jove a valiant foe shall chase,
To save a trembling, heartless, dastard race?"

This said, he stalk'd with ample strides along,
To Crete's brave monarch and his martial throng;
High at their head he saw the chief appear,
And bold Meriones excite the rear.
At this the king his generous joy express'd,
And clasp'd the warrior to his armed breast.
"Divine Idomeneus! what thanks we owe
To worth like thine! what praise shall we bestow?
To thee the foremost honours are decreed,
First in the fight and every graceful deed.
For this, in banquets, when the generous bowls
Restore our blood, and raise the warriors' souls,
Though all the rest with stated rules we bound,
Unmix'd, unmeasured, are thy goblets crown'd.
Be still thyself, in arms a mighty name;
Maintain thy honours, and enlarge thy fame."
To whom the Cretan thus his speech address'd:
"Secure of me, O king! exhort the rest.
Fix'd to thy side, in every toil I share,
Thy firm associate in the day of war.
But let the signal be this moment given;
To mix in fight is all I ask of Heaven.
The field shall prove how perjuries succeed,
And chains or death avenge the impious deed."

Charm'd with this heat, the king his course pursues,
And next the troops of either Ajax views:
In one firm orb the bands were ranged around,
A cloud of heroes blacken'd all the ground.
Thus from the lofty promontory's brow
A swain surveys the gathering storm below;
Slow from the main the heavy vapours rise,
Spread in dim streams, and sail along the skies,
Till black as night the swelling tempest shows,
The cloud condensing as the west-wind blows:
He dreads the impending storm, and drives his flock
To the close covert of an arching rock.

Such, and so thick, the embattled squadrons stood,
With spears erect, a moving iron wood:
A shady light was shot from glimmering shields,
And their brown arms obscured the dusky fields.

"O heroes! worthy such a dauntless train,
Whose godlike virtue we but urge in vain,
(Exclaim'd the king), who raise your eager bands
With great examples, more than loud commands.
Ah! would the gods but breathe in all the rest
Such souls as burn in your exalted breast,
Soon should our arms with just success be crown'd,
And Troy's proud walls lie smoking on the ground."

Then to the next the general bends his course;
(His heart exults, and glories in his force);
There reverend Nestor ranks his Pylian bands,
And with inspiring eloquence commands;
With strictest order sets his train in arms,
The chiefs advises, and the soldiers warms.
Alastor, Chromius, Haemon, round him wait,
Bias the good, and Pelagon the great.
The horse and chariots to the front assign'd,
The foot (the strength of war) he ranged behind;
The middle space suspected troops supply,
Inclosed by both, nor left the power to fly;
He gives command to "curb the fiery steed,
Nor cause confusion, nor the ranks exceed:
Before the rest let none too rashly ride;
No strength nor skill, but just in time, be tried:
The charge once made, no warrior turn the rein,
But fight, or fall; a firm embodied train.
He whom the fortune of the field shall cast
From forth his chariot, mount the next in haste;
Nor seek unpractised to direct the car,
Content with javelins to provoke the war.
Our great forefathers held this prudent course,
Thus ruled their ardour, thus preserved their force;
By laws like these immortal conquests made,
And earth's proud tyrants low in ashes laid."

So spoke the master of the martial art,
And touch'd with transport great Atrides' heart.
"Oh! hadst thou strength to match thy brave desires,
And nerves to second what thy soul inspires!
But wasting years, that wither human race,
Exhaust thy spirits, and thy arms unbrace.
What once thou wert, oh ever mightst thou be!
And age the lot of any chief but thee."

Thus to the experienced prince Atrides cried;
He shook his hoary locks, and thus replied:
"Well might I wish, could mortal wish renew
That strength which once in boiling youth I knew;
Such as I was, when Ereuthalion, slain
Beneath this arm, fell prostrate on the plain.
But heaven its gifts not all at once bestows,
These years with wisdom crowns, with action those:
The field of combat fits the young and bold,
The solemn council best becomes the old:
To you the glorious conflict I resign,
Let sage advice, the palm of age, be mine."

He said. With joy the monarch march'd before,
And found Menestheus on the dusty shore,
With whom the firm Athenian phalanx stands;
And next Ulysses, with his subject bands.
Remote their forces lay, nor knew so far
The peace infringed, nor heard the sounds of war;
The tumult late begun, they stood intent
To watch the motion, dubious of the event.
The king, who saw their squadrons yet unmoved,
With hasty ardour thus the chiefs reproved:

"Can Peleus' son forget a warrior's part.
And fears Ulysses, skill'd in every art?
Why stand you distant, and the rest expect
To mix in combat which yourselves neglect?
From you 'twas hoped among the first to dare
The shock of armies, and commence the war;
For this your names are call'd before the rest,
To share the pleasures of the genial feast:
And can you, chiefs! without a blush survey
Whole troops before you labouring in the fray?
Say, is it thus those honours you requite?
The first in banquets, but the last in fight."

Ulysses heard: the hero's warmth o'erspread
His cheek with blushes: and severe, he said:
"Take back the unjust reproach! Behold we stand
Sheathed in bright arms, and but expect command.
If glorious deeds afford thy soul delight,
Behold me plunging in the thickest fight.
Then give thy warrior-chief a warrior's due,
Who dares to act whate'er thou dar'st to view."
Struck with his generous wrath, the king replies:

"O great in action, and in council wise!
With ours, thy care and ardour are the same,
Nor need I to commend, nor aught to blame.
Sage as thou art, and learn'd in human kind,
Forgive the transport of a martial mind.
Haste to the fight, secure of just amends;
The gods that make, shall keep the worthy, friends."

He said, and pass'd where great Tydides lay,
His steeds and chariots wedged in firm array;
(The warlike Sthenelus attends his side;)
To whom with stern reproach the monarch cried:
"O son of Tydeus! (he, whose strength could tame
The bounding steed, in arms a mighty name)
Canst thou, remote, the mingling hosts descry,
With hands unactive, and a careless eye?
Not thus thy sire the fierce encounter fear'd;
Still first in front the matchless prince appear'd:
What glorious toils, what wonders they recite,
Who view'd him labouring through the ranks of fight?
I saw him once, when gathering martial powers,
A peaceful guest, he sought Mycenae's towers;
Armies he ask'd, and armies had been given,
Not we denied, but Jove forbade from heaven;
While dreadful comets glaring from afar,
Forewarn'd the horrors of the Theban war.
Next, sent by Greece from where Asopus flows,
A fearless envoy, he approach'd the foes;
Thebes' hostile walls unguarded and alone,
Dauntless he enters, and demands the throne.
The tyrant feasting with his chiefs he found,
And dared to combat all those chiefs around:
Dared, and subdued before their haughty lord;
For Pallas strung his arm and edged his sword.
Stung with the shame, within the winding way,
To bar his passage fifty warriors lay;
Two heroes led the secret squadron on,
Mason the fierce, and hardy Lycophon;
Those fifty slaughter'd in the gloomy vale.
He spared but one to bear the dreadful tale,
Such Tydeus was, and such his martial fire;
Gods! how the son degenerates from the sire!"

No words the godlike Diomed return'd,
But heard respectful, and in secret burn'd:
Not so fierce Capaneus' undaunted son;
Stern as his sire, the boaster thus begun:

"What needs, O monarch! this invidious praise,
Ourselves to lessen, while our sire you raise?
Dare to be just, Atrides! and confess
Our value equal, though our fury less.
With fewer troops we storm'd the Theban wall,
And happier saw the sevenfold city fall,
In impious acts the guilty father died;
The sons subdued, for Heaven was on their side.
Far more than heirs of all our parents' fame,
Our glories darken their diminish'd name."

To him Tydides thus: "My friend, forbear;
Suppress thy passion, and the king revere:
His high concern may well excuse this rage,
Whose cause we follow, and whose war we wage:
His the first praise, were Ilion's towers o'erthrown,
And, if we fail, the chief disgrace his own.
Let him the Greeks to hardy toils excite,
'Tis ours to labour in the glorious fight."

He spoke, and ardent, on the trembling ground
Sprung from his car: his ringing arms resound.
Dire was the clang, and dreadful from afar,
Of arm'd Tydides rushing to the war.
As when the winds, ascending by degrees,
First move the whitening surface of the seas,
The billows float in order to the shore,
The wave behind rolls on the wave before;
Till, with the growing storm, the deeps arise,
Foam o'er the rocks, and thunder to the skies.
So to the fight the thick battalions throng,
Shields urged on shields, and men drove men along
Sedate and silent move the numerous bands;
No sound, no whisper, but the chief's commands,
Those only heard; with awe the rest obey,
As if some god had snatch'd their voice away.
Not so the Trojans; from their host ascends
A general shout that all the region rends.
As when the fleecy flocks unnumber'd stand
In wealthy folds, and wait the milker's hand,
The hollow vales incessant bleating fills,
The lambs reply from all the neighbouring hills:
Such clamours rose from various nations round,
Mix'd was the murmur, and confused the sound.
Each host now joins, and each a god inspires,
These Mars incites, and those Minerva fires,
Pale flight around, and dreadful terror reign;
And discord raging bathes the purple plain;
Discord! dire sister of the slaughtering power,
Small at her birth, but rising every hour,
While scarce the skies her horrid head can bound,
She stalks on earth, and shakes the world around;
The nations bleed, where'er her steps she turns,
The groan still deepens, and the combat burns.

Now shield with shield, with helmet helmet closed,
To armour armour, lance to lance opposed,
Host against host with shadowy squadrons drew,
The sounding darts in iron tempests flew,
Victors and vanquish'd join'd promiscuous cries,
And shrilling shouts and dying groans arise;
With streaming blood the slippery fields are dyed,
And slaughter'd heroes swell the dreadful tide.

As torrents roll, increased by numerous rills,
With rage impetuous, down their echoing hills
Rush to the vales, and pour'd along the plain.
Roar through a thousand channels to the main:
The distant shepherd trembling hears the sound;
So mix both hosts, and so their cries rebound.

The bold Antilochus the slaughter led,
The first who struck a valiant Trojan dead:
At great Echepolus the lance arrives,
Razed his high crest, and through his helmet drives;
Warm'd in the brain the brazen weapon lies,
And shades eternal settle o'er his eyes.
So sinks a tower, that long assaults had stood
Of force and fire, its walls besmear'd with blood.
Him, the bold leader of the Abantian throng,
Seized to despoil, and dragg'd the corpse along:
But while he strove to tug the inserted dart,
Agenor's javelin reach'd the hero's heart.
His flank, unguarded by his ample shield,
Admits the lance: he falls, and spurns the field;
The nerves, unbraced, support his limbs no more;
The soul comes floating in a tide of gore.
Trojans and Greeks now gather round the slain;
The war renews, the warriors bleed again:
As o'er their prey rapacious wolves engage,
Man dies on man, and all is blood and rage.

In blooming youth fair Simoisius fell,
Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell;
Fair Simoisius, whom his mother bore
Amid the flocks on silver Simois' shore:
The nymph descending from the hills of Ide,
To seek her parents on his flowery side,
Brought forth the babe, their common care and joy,
And thence from Simois named the lovely boy.
Short was his date! by dreadful Ajax slain,
He falls, and renders all their cares in vain!
So falls a poplar, that in watery ground
Raised high the head, with stately branches crown'd,
(Fell'd by some artist with his shining steel,
To shape the circle of the bending wheel,)
Cut down it lies, tall, smooth, and largely spread,
With all its beauteous honours on its head
There, left a subject to the wind and rain,
And scorch'd by suns, it withers on the plain
Thus pierced by Ajax, Simoisius lies
Stretch'd on the shore, and thus neglected dies.

At Ajax, Antiphus his javelin threw;
The pointed lance with erring fury flew,
And Leucus, loved by wise Ulysses, slew.
He drops the corpse of Simoisius slain,
And sinks a breathless carcase on the plain.
This saw Ulysses, and with grief enraged,
Strode where the foremost of the foes engaged;
Arm'd with his spear, he meditates the wound,
In act to throw; but cautious look'd around,
Struck at his sight the Trojans backward drew,
And trembling heard the javelin as it flew.
A chief stood nigh, who from Abydos came,
Old Priam's son, Democoon was his name.
The weapon entered close above his ear,
Cold through his temples glides the whizzing spear;
With piercing shrieks the youth resigns his breath,
His eye-balls darken with the shades of death;
Ponderous he falls; his clanging arms resound,
And his broad buckler rings against the ground.

Seized with affright the boldest foes appear;
E'en godlike Hector seems himself to fear;
Slow he gave way, the rest tumultuous fled;
The Greeks with shouts press on, and spoil the dead:
But Phoebus now from Ilion's towering height
Shines forth reveal'd, and animates the fight.
"Trojans, be bold, and force with force oppose;
Your foaming steeds urge headlong on the foes!
Nor are their bodies rocks, nor ribb'd with steel;
Your weapons enter, and your strokes they feel.
Have ye forgot what seem'd your dread before?
The great, the fierce Achilles fights no more."

Apollo thus from Ilion's lofty towers,
Array'd in terrors, roused the Trojan powers:
While war's fierce goddess fires the Grecian foe,
And shouts and thunders in the fields below.
Then great Diores fell, by doom divine,
In vain his valour and illustrious line.
A broken rock the force of Pyrus threw,
(Who from cold nus led the Thracian crew,)
Full on his ankle dropp'd the ponderous stone,
Burst the strong nerves, and crash'd the solid bone.
Supine he tumbles on the crimson sands,
Before his helpless friends, and native bands,
And spreads for aid his unavailing hands.
The foe rush'd furious as he pants for breath,
And through his navel drove the pointed death:
His gushing entrails smoked upon the ground,
And the warm life came issuing from the wound.

His lance bold Thoas at the conqueror sent,
Deep in his breast above the pap it went,
Amid the lungs was fix'd the winged wood,
And quivering in his heaving bosom stood:
Till from the dying chief, approaching near,
The tolian warrior tugg'd his weighty spear:
Then sudden waved his flaming falchion round,
And gash'd his belly with a ghastly wound;
The corpse now breathless on the bloody plain,
To spoil his arms the victor strove in vain;
The Thracian bands against the victor press'd,
A grove of lances glitter'd at his breast.
Stern Thoas, glaring with revengeful eyes,
In sullen fury slowly quits the prize.

Thus fell two heroes; one the pride of Thrace,
And one the leader of the Epeian race;
Death's sable shade at once o'ercast their eyes,
In dust the vanquish'd and the victor lies.
With copious slaughter all the fields are red,
And heap'd with growing mountains of the dead.

Had some brave chief this martial scene beheld,
By Pallas guarded through the dreadful field;
Might darts be bid to turn their points away,
And swords around him innocently play;
The war's whole art with wonder had he seen,
And counted heroes where he counted men.

So fought each host, with thirst of glory fired,
And crowds on crowds triumphantly expired.

But Pallas now Tydides' soul inspires,
Fills with her force, and warms with all her fires,
Above the Greeks his deathless fame to raise,
And crown her hero with distinguish'd praise.
High on his helm celestial lightnings play,
His beamy shield emits a living ray;
The unwearied blaze incessant streams supplies,
Like the red star that fires the autumnal skies,
When fresh he rears his radiant orb to sight,
And, bathed in ocean, shoots a keener light.
Such glories Pallas on the chief bestow'd,
Such, from his arms, the fierce effulgence flow'd:
Onward she drives him, furious to engage,
Where the fight burns, and where the thickest rage.

The sons of Dares first the combat sought,
A wealthy priest, but rich without a fault;
In Vulcan's fane the father's days were led,
The sons to toils of glorious battle bred;
These singled from their troops the fight maintain,
These, from their steeds, Tydides on the plain.
Fierce for renown the brother-chiefs draw near,
And first bold Phegeus cast his sounding spear,
Which o'er the warrior's shoulder took its course,
And spent in empty air its erring force.
Not so, Tydides, flew thy lance in vain,
But pierced his breast, and stretch'd him on the plain.
Seized with unusual fear, Idaeus fled,
Left the rich chariot, and his brother dead.
And had not Vulcan lent celestial aid,
He too had sunk to death's eternal shade;
But in a smoky cloud the god of fire
Preserved the son, in pity to the sire.
The steeds and chariot, to the navy led,
Increased the spoils of gallant Diomed.

Struck with amaze and shame, the Trojan crew,
Or slain, or fled, the sons of Dares view;
When by the blood-stain'd hand Minerva press'd
The god of battles, and this speech address'd:

"Stern power of war! by whom the mighty fall,
Who bathe in blood, and shake the lofty wall!
Let the brave chiefs their glorious toils divide;
And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide:
While we from interdicted fields retire,
Nor tempt the wrath of heaven's avenging sire."

Her words allay the impetuous warrior's heat,
The god of arms and martial maid retreat;
Removed from fight, on Xanthus' flowery bounds
They sat, and listen'd to the dying sounds.

Meantime, the Greeks the Trojan race pursue,
And some bold chieftain every leader slew:
First Odius falls, and bites the bloody sand,
His death ennobled by Atrides' hand:

As he to flight his wheeling car address'd,
The speedy javelin drove from back to breast.
In dust the mighty Halizonian lay,
His arms resound, the spirit wings its way.

Thy fate was next, O Phaestus! doom'd to feel
The great Idomeneus' protended steel;
Whom Borus sent (his son and only joy)
From fruitful Tarne to the fields of Troy.
The Cretan javelin reach'd him from afar,
And pierced his shoulder as he mounts his car;
Back from the car he tumbles to the ground,
And everlasting shades his eyes surround.

Then died Scamandrius, expert in the chase,
In woods and wilds to wound the savage race;
Diana taught him all her sylvan arts,
To bend the bow, and aim unerring darts:
But vainly here Diana's arts he tries,
The fatal lance arrests him as he flies;
From Menelaus' arm the weapon sent,
Through his broad back and heaving bosom went:
Down sinks the warrior with a thundering sound,
His brazen armour rings against the ground.

Next artful Phereclus untimely fell;
Bold Merion sent him to the realms of hell.
Thy father's skill, O Phereclus! was thine,
The graceful fabric and the fair design;
For loved by Pallas, Pallas did impart
To him the shipwright's and the builder's art.
Beneath his hand the fleet of Paris rose,
The fatal cause of all his country's woes;
But he, the mystic will of heaven unknown,
Nor saw his country's peril, nor his own.
The hapless artist, while confused he fled,
The spear of Merion mingled with the dead.
Through his right hip, with forceful fury cast,
Between the bladder and the bone it pass'd;
Prone on his knees he falls with fruitless cries,
And death in lasting slumber seals his eyes.

From Meges' force the swift Pedaeus fled,
Antenor's offspring from a foreign bed,
Whose generous spouse, Theanor, heavenly fair,
Nursed the young stranger with a mother's care.
How vain those cares! when Meges in the rear
Full in his nape infix'd the fatal spear;
Swift through his crackling jaws the weapon glides,
And the cold tongue and grinning teeth divides.

Then died Hypsenor, generous and divine,
Sprung from the brave Dolopion's mighty line,
Who near adored Scamander made abode,
Priest of the stream, and honoured as a god.
On him, amidst the flying numbers found,
Eurypylus inflicts a deadly wound;
On his broad shoulders fell the forceful brand,
Thence glancing downwards, lopp'd his holy hand,
Which stain'd with sacred blood the blushing sand.
Down sunk the priest: the purple hand of death
Closed his dim eye, and fate suppress'd his breath.

Thus toil'd the chiefs, in different parts engaged.
In every quarter fierce Tydides raged;
Amid the Greek, amid the Trojan train,
Rapt through the ranks he thunders o'er the plain;
Now here, now there, he darts from place to place,
Pours on the rear, or lightens in their face.
Thus from high hills the torrents swift and strong
Deluge whole fields, and sweep the trees along,
Through ruin'd moles the rushing wave resounds,
O'erwhelm's the bridge, and bursts the lofty bounds;
The yellow harvests of the ripen'd year,
And flatted vineyards, one sad waste appear!
While Jove descends in sluicy sheets of rain,
And all the labours of mankind are vain.

So raged Tydides, boundless in his ire,
Drove armies back, and made all Troy retire.
With grief the leader of the Lycian band
Saw the wide waste of his destructive hand:
His bended bow against the chief he drew;
Swift to the mark the thirsty arrow flew,
Whose forky point the hollow breastplate tore,
Deep in his shoulder pierced, and drank the gore:
The rushing stream his brazen armour dyed,
While the proud archer thus exulting cried:

"Hither, ye Trojans, hither drive your steeds!
Lo! by our hand the bravest Grecian bleeds,
Not long the deathful dart he can sustain;
Or Phoebus urged me to these fields in vain."
So spoke he, boastful: but the winged dart
Stopp'd short of life, and mock'd the shooter's art.
The wounded chief, behind his car retired,
The helping hand of Sthenelus required;
Swift from his seat he leap'd upon the ground,
And tugg'd the weapon from the gushing wound;
When thus the king his guardian power address'd,
The purple current wandering o'er his vest:

"O progeny of Jove! unconquer'd maid!
If e'er my godlike sire deserved thy aid,
If e'er I felt thee in the fighting field;
Now, goddess, now, thy sacred succour yield.
O give my lance to reach the Trojan knight,
Whose arrow wounds the chief thou guard'st in fight;
And lay the boaster grovelling on the shore,
That vaunts these eyes shall view the light no more."

Thus pray'd Tydides, and Minerva heard,
His nerves confirm'd, his languid spirits cheer'd;
He feels each limb with wonted vigour light;
His beating bosom claim'd the promised fight.
"Be bold, (she cried), in every combat shine,
War be thy province, thy protection mine;
Rush to the fight, and every foe control;
Wake each paternal virtue in thy soul:
Strength swells thy boiling breast, infused by me,
And all thy godlike father breathes in thee;
Yet more, from mortal mists I purge thy eyes,
And set to view the warring deities.
These see thou shun, through all the embattled plain;
Nor rashly strive where human force is vain.
If Venus mingle in the martial band,
Her shalt thou wound: so Pallas gives command."

With that, the blue-eyed virgin wing'd her flight;
The hero rush'd impetuous to the fight;
With tenfold ardour now invades the plain,
Wild with delay, and more enraged by pain.
As on the fleecy flocks when hunger calls,
Amidst the field a brindled lion falls;
If chance some shepherd with a distant dart
The savage wound, he rouses at the smart,
He foams, he roars; the shepherd dares not stay,
But trembling leaves the scattering flocks a prey;
Heaps fall on heaps; he bathes with blood the ground,
Then leaps victorious o'er the lofty mound.
Not with less fury stern Tydides flew;
And two brave leaders at an instant slew;
Astynous breathless fell, and by his side,
His people's pastor, good Hypenor, died;
Astynous' breast the deadly lance receives,
Hypenor's shoulder his broad falchion cleaves.
Those slain he left, and sprung with noble rage
Abas and Polyidus to engage;
Sons of Eurydamus, who, wise and old,
Could fate foresee, and mystic dreams unfold;
The youths return'd not from the doubtful plain,
And the sad father tried his arts in vain;
No mystic dream could make their fates appear,
Though now determined by Tydides' spear.

Young Xanthus next, and Thoon felt his rage;
The joy and hope of Phaenops' feeble age:
Vast was his wealth, and these the only heirs
Of all his labours and a life of cares.
Cold death o'ertakes them in their blooming years,
And leaves the father unavailing tears:
To strangers now descends his heapy store,
The race forgotten, and the name no more.

Two sons of Priam in one chariot ride,
Glittering in arms, and combat side by side.
As when the lordly lion seeks his food
Where grazing heifers range the lonely wood,
He leaps amidst them with a furious bound,
Bends their strong necks, and tears them to the ground:
So from their seats the brother chiefs are torn,
Their steeds and chariot to the navy borne.

With deep concern divine neas view'd
The foe prevailing, and his friends pursued;
Through the thick storm of singing spears he flies,
Exploring Pandarus with careful eyes.
At length he found Lycaon's mighty son;
To whom the chief of Venus' race begun:

"Where, Pandarus, are all thy honours now,
Thy winged arrows and unerring bow,
Thy matchless skill, thy yet unrivall'd fame,
And boasted glory of the Lycian name?
O pierce that mortal! if we mortal call
That wondrous force by which whole armies fall;
Or god incensed, who quits the distant skies
To punish Troy for slighted sacrifice;
(Which, oh avert from our unhappy state!
For what so dreadful as celestial hate)?
Whoe'er he be, propitiate Jove with prayer;
If man, destroy; if god, entreat to spare."

To him the Lycian: "Whom your eyes behold,
If right I judge, is Diomed the bold:
Such coursers whirl him o'er the dusty field,
So towers his helmet, and so flames his shield.
If 'tis a god, he wears that chief's disguise:
Or if that chief, some guardian of the skies,
Involved in clouds, protects him in the fray,
And turns unseen the frustrate dart away.
I wing'd an arrow, which not idly fell,
The stroke had fix'd him to the gates of hell;
And, but some god, some angry god withstands,
His fate was due to these unerring hands.
Skill'd in the bow, on foot I sought the war,
Nor join'd swift horses to the rapid car.
Ten polish'd chariots I possess'd at home,
And still they grace Lycaon's princely dome:
There veil'd in spacious coverlets they stand;
And twice ten coursers wait their lord's command.
The good old warrior bade me trust to these,
When first for Troy I sail'd the sacred seas;
In fields, aloft, the whirling car to guide,
And through the ranks of death triumphant ride.
But vain with youth, and yet to thrift inclined,
I heard his counsels with unheedful mind,
And thought the steeds (your large supplies unknown)
Might fail of forage in the straiten'd town;
So took my bow and pointed darts in hand
And left the chariots in my native land.

"Too late, O friend! my rashness I deplore;
These shafts, once fatal, carry death no more.
Tydeus' and Atreus' sons their points have found,
And undissembled gore pursued the wound.
In vain they bleed: this unavailing bow
Serves, not to slaughter, but provoke the foe.
In evil hour these bended horns I strung,
And seized the quiver where it idly hung.
Cursed be the fate that sent me to the field
Without a warrior's arms, the spear and shield!
If e'er with life I quit the Trojan plain,
If e'er I see my spouse and sire again,
This bow, unfaithful to my glorious aims,
Broke by my hand, shall feed the blazing flames."

To whom the leader of the Dardan race:
"Be calm, nor Phoebus' honour'd gift disgrace.
The distant dart be praised, though here we need
The rushing chariot and the bounding steed.
Against yon hero let us bend our course,
And, hand to hand, encounter force with force.
Now mount my seat, and from the chariot's height
Observe my father's steeds, renown'd in fight;
Practised alike to turn, to stop, to chase,
To dare the shock, or urge the rapid race;
Secure with these, through fighting fields we go;
Or safe to Troy, if Jove assist the foe.
Haste, seize the whip, and snatch the guiding rein;
The warrior's fury let this arm sustain;
Or, if to combat thy bold heart incline,
Take thou the spear, the chariot's care be mine."

"O prince! (Lycaon's valiant son replied)
As thine the steeds, be thine the task to guide.
The horses, practised to their lord's command,
Shall bear the rein, and answer to thy hand;
But, if, unhappy, we desert the fight,
Thy voice alone can animate their flight;
Else shall our fates be number'd with the dead,
And these, the victor's prize, in triumph led.
Thine be the guidance, then: with spear and shield
Myself will charge this terror of the field."

And now both heroes mount the glittering car;
The bounding coursers rush amidst the war;
Their fierce approach bold Sthenelus espied,
Who thus, alarm'd, to great Tydides cried:

"O friend! two chiefs of force immense I see,
Dreadful they come, and bend their rage on thee:
Lo the brave heir of old Lycaon's line,
And great neas, sprung from race divine!
Enough is given to fame. Ascend thy car!
And save a life, the bulwark of our war."

At this the hero cast a gloomy look,
Fix'd on the chief with scorn; and thus he spoke:

"Me dost thou bid to shun the coming fight?
Me wouldst thou move to base, inglorious flight?
Know, 'tis not honest in my soul to fear,
Nor was Tydides born to tremble here.
I hate the cumbrous chariot's slow advance,
And the long distance of the flying lance;
But while my nerves are strong, my force entire,
Thus front the foe, and emulate my sire.
Nor shall yon steeds, that fierce to fight convey
Those threatening heroes, bear them both away;
One chief at least beneath this arm shall die;
So Pallas tells me, and forbids to fly.
But if she dooms, and if no god withstand,
That both shall fall by one victorious hand,
Then heed my words: my horses here detain,
Fix'd to the chariot by the straiten'd rein;
Swift to neas' empty seat proceed,
And seize the coursers of ethereal breed;
The race of those, which once the thundering god
For ravish'd Ganymede on Tros bestow'd,
The best that e'er on earth's broad surface run,
Beneath the rising or the setting sun.
Hence great Anchises stole a breed unknown,
By mortal mares, from fierce Laomedon:
Four of this race his ample stalls contain,
And two transport neas o'er the plain.
These, were the rich immortal prize our own,
Through the wide world should make our glory known."

Thus while they spoke, the foe came furious on,
And stern Lycaon's warlike race begun:

"Prince, thou art met. Though late in vain assail'd,
The spear may enter where the arrow fail'd."

He said, then shook the ponderous lance, and flung;
On his broad shield the sounding weapon rung,
Pierced the tough orb, and in his cuirass hung,
"He bleeds! the pride of Greece! (the boaster cries,)
Our triumph now, the mighty warrior lies!"
"Mistaken vaunter! (Diomed replied;)
Thy dart has erred, and now my spear be tried;
Ye 'scape not both; one, headlong from his car,
With hostile blood shall glut the god of war."

He spoke, and rising hurl'd his forceful dart,
Which, driven by Pallas, pierced a vital part;
Full in his face it enter'd, and betwixt
The nose and eye-ball the proud Lycian fix'd;
Crash'd all his jaws, and cleft the tongue within,
Till the bright point look'd out beneath the chin.
Headlong he falls, his helmet knocks the ground:
Earth groans beneath him, and his arms resound;
The starting coursers tremble with affright;
The soul indignant seeks the realms of night.

To guard his slaughter'd friend, neas flies,
His spear extending where the carcase lies;
Watchful he wheels, protects it every way,
As the grim lion stalks around his prey.
O'er the fall'n trunk his ample shield display'd,
He hides the hero with his mighty shade,
And threats aloud! the Greeks with longing eyes
Behold at distance, but forbear the prize.
Then fierce Tydides stoops; and from the fields
Heaved with vast force, a rocky fragment wields.
Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise,
Such men as live in these degenerate days:
He swung it round; and, gathering strength to throw,
Discharged the ponderous ruin at the foe.
Where to the hip the inserted thigh unites,
Full on the bone the pointed marble lights;
Through both the tendons broke the rugged stone,
And stripp'd the skin, and crack'd the solid bone.
Sunk on his knees, and staggering with his pains,
His falling bulk his bended arm sustains;
Lost in a dizzy mist the warrior lies;
A sudden cloud comes swimming o'er his eyes.
There the brave chief, who mighty numbers sway'd,
Oppress'd had sunk to death's eternal shade,
But heavenly Venus, mindful of the love
She bore Anchises in the Idaean grove,
His danger views with anguish and despair,
And guards her offspring with a mother's care.
About her much-loved son her arms she throws,
Her arms whose whiteness match the falling snows.
Screen'd from the foe behind her shining veil,
The swords wave harmless, and the javelins fail;
Safe through the rushing horse, and feather'd flight
Of sounding shafts, she bears him from the fight.

Nor Sthenelus, with unassisting hands,
Remain'd unheedful of his lord's commands:
His panting steeds, removed from out the war,
He fix'd with straiten'd traces to the car,
Next, rushing to the Dardan spoil, detains
The heavenly coursers with the flowing manes:
These in proud triumph to the fleet convey'd,
No longer now a Trojan lord obey'd.
That charge to bold Deipylus he gave,
(Whom most he loved, as brave men love the brave,)
Then mounting on his car, resumed the rein,
And follow'd where Tydides swept the plain.

Meanwhile (his conquest ravished from his eyes)
The raging chief in chase of Venus flies:
No goddess she, commission'd to the field,
Like Pallas dreadful with her sable shield,
Or fierce Bellona thundering at the wall,
While flames ascend, and mighty ruins fall;
He knew soft combats suit the tender dame,
New to the field, and still a foe to fame.
Through breaking ranks his furious course he bends,
And at the goddess his broad lance extends;
Through her bright veil the daring weapon drove,
The ambrosial veil which all the Graces wove;
Her snowy hand the razing steel profaned,
And the transparent skin with crimson stain'd,
From the clear vein a stream immortal flow'd,
Such stream as issues from a wounded god;
Pure emanation! uncorrupted flood!
Unlike our gross, diseased, terrestrial blood:
(For not the bread of man their life sustains,
Nor wine's inflaming juice supplies their veins:)
With tender shrieks the goddess fill'd the place,
And dropp'd her offspring from her weak embrace.
Him Phoebus took: he casts a cloud around
The fainting chief, and wards the mortal wound.

Then with a voice that shook the vaulted skies,
The king insults the goddess as she flies:
"Ill with Jove's daughter bloody fights agree,
The field of combat is no scene for thee:
Go, let thy own soft sex employ thy care,
Go, lull the coward, or delude the fair.
Taught by this stroke renounce the war's alarms,
And learn to tremble at the name of arms."

Tydides thus. The goddess, seized with dread,
Confused, distracted, from the conflict fled.
To aid her, swift the winged Iris flew,
Wrapt in a mist above the warring crew.
The queen of love with faded charms she found.
Pale was her cheek, and livid look'd the wound.
To Mars, who sat remote, they bent their way:
Far, on the left, with clouds involved he lay;
Beside him stood his lance, distain'd with gore,
And, rein'd with gold, his foaming steeds before.
Low at his knee, she begg'd with streaming eyes
Her brother's car, to mount the distant skies,
And show'd the wound by fierce Tydides given,
A mortal man, who dares encounter heaven.
Stern Mars attentive hears the queen complain,
And to her hand commits the golden rein;
She mounts the seat, oppress'd with silent woe,
Driven by the goddess of the painted bow.
The lash resounds, the rapid chariot flies,
And in a moment scales the lofty skies:
They stopp'd the car, and there the coursers stood,
Fed by fair Iris with ambrosial food;
Before her mother, love's bright queen appears,
O'erwhelmed with anguish, and dissolved in tears:
She raised her in her arms, beheld her bleed,
And ask'd what god had wrought this guilty deed?

Then she: "This insult from no god I found,
An impious mortal gave the daring wound!
Behold the deed of haughty Diomed!
'Twas in the son's defence the mother bled.
The war with Troy no more the Grecians wage;
But with the gods (the immortal gods) engage."

Dione then: "Thy wrongs with patience bear,
And share those griefs inferior powers must share:
Unnumber'd woes mankind from us sustain,
And men with woes afflict the gods again.
The mighty Mars in mortal fetters bound,
And lodged in brazen dungeons underground,
Full thirteen moons imprison'd roar'd in vain;
Otus and Ephialtes held the chain:
Perhaps had perish'd had not Hermes' care
Restored the groaning god to upper air.
Great Juno's self has borne her weight of pain,
The imperial partner of the heavenly reign;
Amphitryon's son infix'd the deadly dart,
And fill'd with anguish her immortal heart.
E'en hell's grim king Alcides' power confess'd,
The shaft found entrance in his iron breast;
To Jove's high palace for a cure he fled,
Pierced in his own dominions of the dead;
Where Paeon, sprinkling heavenly balm around,
Assuaged the glowing pangs, and closed the wound.
Rash, impious man! to stain the bless'd abodes,
And drench his arrows in the blood of gods!

"But thou (though Pallas urged thy frantic deed),
Whose spear ill-fated makes a goddess bleed,
Know thou, whoe'er with heavenly power contends,
Short is his date, and soon his glory ends;
From fields of death when late he shall retire,
No infant on his knees shall call him sire.
Strong as thou art, some god may yet be found,
To stretch thee pale and gasping on the ground;
Thy distant wife, giale the fair,
Starting from sleep with a distracted air,
Shall rouse thy slaves, and her lost lord deplore,
The brave, the great, the glorious now no more!"

This said, she wiped from Venus' wounded palm
The sacred ichor, and infused the balm.
Juno and Pallas with a smile survey'd,
And thus to Jove began the blue-eyed maid:

"Permit thy daughter, gracious Jove! to tell
How this mischance the Cyprian queen befell,
As late she tried with passion to inflame
The tender bosom of a Grecian dame;
Allured the fair, with moving thoughts of joy,
To quit her country for some youth of Troy;
The clasping zone, with golden buckles bound,
Razed her soft hand with this lamented wound."

The sire of gods and men superior smiled,
And, calling Venus, thus address'd his child:
"Not these, O daughter are thy proper cares,
Thee milder arts befit, and softer wars;
Sweet smiles are thine, and kind endearing charms;
To Mars and Pallas leave the deeds of arms."

Thus they in heaven: while on the plain below
The fierce Tydides charged his Dardan foe,
Flush'd with celestial blood pursued his way,
And fearless dared the threatening god of day;
Already in his hopes he saw him kill'd,
Though screen'd behind Apollo's mighty shield.
Thrice rushing furious, at the chief he strook;
His blazing buckler thrice Apollo shook:
He tried the fourth: when, breaking from the cloud,
A more than mortal voice was heard aloud.

"O son of Tydeus, cease! be wise and see
How vast the difference of the gods and thee;
Distance immense! between the powers that shine
Above, eternal, deathless, and divine,
And mortal man! a wretch of humble birth,
A short-lived reptile in the dust of earth."

So spoke the god who darts celestial fires:
He dreads his fury, and some steps retires.
Then Phoebus bore the chief of Venus' race
To Troy's high fane, and to his holy place;
Latona there and Phoebe heal'd the wound,
With vigour arm'd him, and with glory crown'd.
This done, the patron of the silver bow
A phantom raised, the same in shape and show
With great neas; such the form he bore,
And such in fight the radiant arms he wore.
Around the spectre bloody wars are waged,
And Greece and Troy with clashing shields engaged.
Meantime on Ilion's tower Apollo stood,
And calling Mars, thus urged the raging god:

"Stern power of arms, by whom the mighty fall;
Who bathest in blood, and shakest the embattled wall,
Rise in thy wrath! to hell's abhorr'd abodes
Despatch yon Greek, and vindicate the gods.
First rosy Venus felt his brutal rage;
Me next he charged, and dares all heaven engage:
The wretch would brave high heaven's immortal sire,
His triple thunder, and his bolts of fire."

The god of battle issues on the plain,
Stirs all the ranks, and fires the Trojan train;
In form like Acamas, the Thracian guide,
Enraged to Troy's retiring chiefs he cried:

"How long, ye sons of Priam! will ye fly,
And unrevenged see Priam's people die?
Still unresisted shall the foe destroy,
And stretch the slaughter to the gates of Troy?
Lo, brave neas sinks beneath his wound,
Not godlike Hector more in arms renown'd:
Haste all, and take the generous warrior's part.
He said;--new courage swell'd each hero's heart.
Sarpedon first his ardent soul express'd,
And, turn'd to Hector, these bold words address'd:

"Say, chief, is all thy ancient valour lost?
Where are thy threats, and where thy glorious boast,
That propp'd alone by Priam's race should stand
Troy's sacred walls, nor need a foreign hand?
Now, now thy country calls her wonted friends,
And the proud vaunt in just derision ends.
Remote they stand while alien troops engage,
Like trembling hounds before the lion's rage.
Far distant hence I held my wide command,
Where foaming Xanthus laves the Lycian land;
With ample wealth (the wish of mortals) bless'd,
A beauteous wife, and infant at her breast;
With those I left whatever dear could be:
Greece, if she conquers, nothing wins from me;
Yet first in fight my Lycian bands I cheer,
And long to meet this mighty man ye fear;
While Hector idle stands, nor bids the brave
Their wives, their infants, and their altars save.
Haste, warrior, haste! preserve thy threaten'd state,
Or one vast burst of all-involving fate
Full o'er your towers shall fall, and sweep away
Sons, sires, and wives, an undistinguish'd prey.
Rouse all thy Trojans, urge thy aids to fight;
These claim thy thoughts by day, thy watch by night;
With force incessant the brave Greeks oppose;
Such cares thy friends deserve, and such thy foes."

Stung to the heart the generous Hector hears,
But just reproof with decent silence bears.
From his proud car the prince impetuous springs,
On earth he leaps, his brazen armour rings.
Two shining spears are brandish'd in his hands;
Thus arm'd, he animates his drooping bands,
Revives their ardour, turns their steps from flight,
And wakes anew the dying flames of fight.
They turn, they stand; the Greeks their fury dare,
Condense their powers, and wait the growing war.

As when, on Ceres' sacred floor, the swain
Spreads the wide fan to clear the golden grain,
And the light chaff, before the breezes borne,
Ascends in clouds from off the heapy corn;
The grey dust, rising with collected winds,
Drives o'er the barn, and whitens all the hinds:
So white with dust the Grecian host appears.
From trampling steeds, and thundering charioteers;
The dusky clouds from labour'd earth arise,
And roll in smoking volumes to the skies.
Mars hovers o'er them with his sable shield,
And adds new horrors to the darken'd field:
Pleased with his charge, and ardent to fulfil,
In Troy's defence, Apollo's heavenly will:
Soon as from fight the blue-eyed maid retires,
Each Trojan bosom with new warmth he fires.
And now the god, from forth his sacred fane,
Produced neas to the shouting train;
Alive, unharm'd, with all his peers around,
Erect he stood, and vigorous from his wound:
Inquiries none they made; the dreadful day
No pause of words admits, no dull delay;
Fierce Discord storms, Apollo loud exclaims,
Fame calls, Mars thunders, and the field's in flames.

Stern Diomed with either Ajax stood,
And great Ulysses, bathed in hostile blood.
Embodied close, the labouring Grecian train
The fiercest shock of charging hosts sustain.
Unmoved and silent, the whole war they wait
Serenely dreadful, and as fix'd as fate.
So when the embattled clouds in dark array,
Along the skies their gloomy lines display;
When now the North his boisterous rage has spent,
And peaceful sleeps the liquid element:
The low-hung vapours, motionless and still,
Rest on the summits of the shaded hill;
Till the mass scatters as the winds arise,
Dispersed and broken through the ruffled skies.

Nor was the general wanting to his train;
From troop to troop he toils through all the plain,
"Ye Greeks, be men! the charge of battle bear;
Your brave associates and yourselves revere!
Let glorious acts more glorious acts inspire,
And catch from breast to breast the noble fire!
On valour's side the odds of combat lie,
The brave live glorious, or lamented die;
The wretch who trembles in the field of fame,
Meets death, and worse than death, eternal shame!"

These words he seconds with his flying lance,
To meet whose point was strong Deicoon's chance:
neas' friend, and in his native place
Honour'd and loved like Priam's royal race:
Long had he fought the foremost in the field,
But now the monarch's lance transpierced his shield:
His shield too weak the furious dart to stay,
Through his broad belt the weapon forced its way:
The grisly wound dismiss'd his soul to hell,
His arms around him rattled as he fell.

Then fierce neas, brandishing his blade,
In dust Orsilochus and Crethon laid,
Whose sire Diocleus, wealthy, brave and great,
In well-built Pherae held his lofty seat:
Sprung from Alpheus' plenteous stream, that yields
Increase of harvests to the Pylian fields.
He got Orsilochus, Diocleus he,
And these descended in the third degree.
Too early expert in the martial toil,
In sable ships they left their native soil,
To avenge Atrides: now, untimely slain,
They fell with glory on the Phrygian plain.
So two young mountain lions, nursed with blood
In deep recesses of the gloomy wood,
Rush fearless to the plains, and uncontroll'd
Depopulate the stalls and waste the fold:
Till pierced at distance from their native den,
O'erpowered they fall beneath the force of men.
Prostrate on earth their beauteous bodies lay,
Like mountain firs, as tall and straight as they.
Great Menelaus views with pitying eyes,
Lifts his bright lance, and at the victor flies;
Mars urged him on; yet, ruthless in his hate,
The god but urged him to provoke his fate.
He thus advancing, Nestor's valiant son
Shakes for his danger, and neglects his own;
Struck with the thought, should Helen's lord be slain,
And all his country's glorious labours vain.
Already met, the threatening heroes stand;
The spears already tremble in their hand:
In rush'd Antilochus, his aid to bring,
And fall or conquer by the Spartan king.
These seen, the Dardan backward turn'd his course,
Brave as he was, and shunn'd unequal force.
The breathless bodies to the Greeks they drew,
Then mix in combat, and their toils renew.

First, Pylaemenes, great in battle, bled,
Who sheathed in brass the Paphlagonians led.
Atrides mark'd him where sublime he stood;
Fix'd in his throat the javelin drank his blood.
The faithful Mydon, as he turn'd from fight
His flying coursers, sunk to endless night;
A broken rock by Nestor's son was thrown:
His bended arm received the falling stone;
From his numb'd hand the ivory-studded reins,
Dropp'd in the dust, are trail'd along the plains:
Meanwhile his temples feel a deadly wound;
He groans in death, and ponderous sinks to ground:
Deep drove his helmet in the sands, and there
The head stood fix'd, the quivering legs in air,
Till trampled flat beneath the coursers' feet:
The youthful victor mounts his empty seat,
And bears the prize in triumph to the fleet.

Great Hector saw, and, raging at the view,
Pours on the Greeks: the Trojan troops pursue:
He fires his host with animating cries,
And brings along the furies of the skies,
Mars, stern destroyer! and Bellona dread,
Flame in the front, and thunder at their head:
This swells the tumult and the rage of fight;
That shakes a spear that casts a dreadful light.
Where Hector march'd, the god of battles shined,
Now storm'd before him, and now raged behind.

Tydides paused amidst his full career;
Then first the hero's manly breast knew fear.
As when some simple swain his cot forsakes,
And wide through fens an unknown journey takes:
If chance a swelling brook his passage stay,
And foam impervious 'cross the wanderer's way,
Confused he stops, a length of country pass'd,
Eyes the rough waves, and tired, returns at last.
Amazed no less the great Tydides stands:
He stay'd, and turning thus address'd his bands:

"No wonder, Greeks! that all to Hector yield;
Secure of favouring gods, he takes the field;
His strokes they second, and avert our spears.
Behold where Mars in mortal arms appears!
Retire then, warriors, but sedate and slow;
Retire, but with your faces to the foe.
Trust not too much your unavailing might;
'Tis not with Troy, but with the gods ye fight."

Now near the Greeks the black battalions drew;
And first two leaders valiant Hector slew:
His force Anchialus and Mnesthes found,
In every art of glorious war renown'd;
In the same car the chiefs to combat ride,
And fought united, and united died.
Struck at the sight, the mighty Ajax glows
With thirst of vengeance, and assaults the foes.
His massy spear with matchless fury sent,
Through Amphius' belt and heaving belly went;
Amphius Apaesus' happy soil possess'd,
With herds abounding, and with treasure bless'd;
But fate resistless from his country led
The chief, to perish at his people's head.
Shook with his fall his brazen armour rung,
And fierce, to seize it, conquering Ajax sprung;
Around his head an iron tempest rain'd;
A wood of spears his ample shield sustain'd:
Beneath one foot the yet warm corpse he press'd,
And drew his javelin from the bleeding breast:
He could no more; the showering darts denied
To spoil his glittering arms, and plumy pride.
Now foes on foes came pouring on the fields,
With bristling lances, and compacted shields;
Till in the steely circle straiten'd round,
Forced he gives way, and sternly quits the ground.

While thus they strive, Tlepolemus the great,
Urged by the force of unresisted fate,
Burns with desire Sarpedon's strength to prove;
Alcides' offspring meets the son of Jove.
Sheathed in bright arms each adverse chief came on.
Jove's great descendant, and his greater son.
Prepared for combat, ere the lance he toss'd,
The daring Rhodian vents his haughty boast:

"What brings this Lycian counsellor so far,
To tremble at our arms, not mix in war!
Know thy vain self, nor let their flattery move,
Who style thee son of cloud-compelling Jove.
How far unlike those chiefs of race divine,
How vast the difference of their deeds and thine!
Jove got such heroes as my sire, whose soul
No fear could daunt, nor earth nor hell control.
Troy felt his arm, and yon proud ramparts stand
Raised on the ruins of his vengeful hand:
With six small ships, and but a slender train,
He left the town a wide-deserted plain.
But what art thou, who deedless look'st around,
While unrevenged thy Lycians bite the ground!
Small aid to Troy thy feeble force can be;
But wert thou greater, thou must yield to me.
Pierced by my spear, to endless darkness go!
I make this present to the shades below."

The son of Hercules, the Rhodian guide,
Thus haughty spoke. The Lycian king replied:

"Thy sire, O prince! o'erturn'd the Trojan state,
Whose perjured monarch well deserved his fate;
Those heavenly steeds the hero sought so far,
False he detain'd, the just reward of war.
Nor so content, the generous chief defied,
With base reproaches and unmanly pride.
But you, unworthy the high race you boast,
Shall raise my glory when thy own is lost:
Now meet thy fate, and by Sarpedon slain,
Add one more ghost to Pluto's gloomy reign."

He said: both javelins at an instant flew;
Both struck, both wounded, but Sarpedon's slew:
Full in the boaster's neck the weapon stood,
Transfix'd his throat, and drank the vital blood;
The soul disdainful seeks the caves of night,
And his seal'd eyes for ever lose the light.

Yet not in vain, Tlepolemus, was thrown
Thy angry lance; which piercing to the bone
Sarpedon's thigh, had robb'd the chief of breath;
But Jove was present, and forbade the death.
Borne from the conflict by his Lycian throng,
The wounded hero dragg'd the lance along.
(His friends, each busied in his several part,
Through haste, or danger, had not drawn the dart.)
The Greeks with slain Tlepolemus retired;
Whose fall Ulysses view'd, with fury fired;
Doubtful if Jove's great son he should pursue,
Or pour his vengeance on the Lycian crew.
But heaven and fate the first design withstand,
Nor this great death must grace Ulysses' hand.
Minerva drives him on the Lycian train;
Alastor, Cronius, Halius, strew'd the plain,
Alcander, Prytanis, Noemon fell:
And numbers more his sword had sent to hell,
But Hector saw; and, furious at the sight,
Rush'd terrible amidst the ranks of fight.
With joy Sarpedon view'd the wish'd relief,
And, faint, lamenting, thus implored the chief:

"O suffer not the foe to bear away
My helpless corpse, an unassisted prey;
If I, unbless'd, must see my son no more,
My much-loved consort, and my native shore,
Yet let me die in Ilion's sacred wall;
Troy, in whose cause I fell, shall mourn my fall."

He said, nor Hector to the chief replies,
But shakes his plume, and fierce to combat flies;
Swift as a whirlwind, drives the scattering foes;
And dyes the ground with purple as he goes.

Beneath a beech, Jove's consecrated shade,
His mournful friends divine Sarpedon laid:
Brave Pelagon, his favourite chief, was nigh,
Who wrench'd the javelin from his sinewy thigh.
The fainting soul stood ready wing'd for flight,
And o'er his eye-balls swam the shades of night;
But Boreas rising fresh, with gentle breath,
Recall'd his spirit from the gates of death.

The generous Greeks recede with tardy pace,
Though Mars and Hector thunder in their face;
None turn their backs to mean ignoble flight,
Slow they retreat, and even retreating fight.
Who first, who last, by Mars' and Hector's hand,
Stretch'd in their blood, lay gasping on the sand?
Tenthras the great, Orestes the renown'd
For managed steeds, and Trechus press'd the ground;,
Next Oenomaus and Oenops' offspring died;
Oresbius last fell groaning at their side:
Oresbius, in his painted mitre gay,
In fat Boeotia held his wealthy sway,
Where lakes surround low Hyle's watery plain;
A prince and people studious of their gain.

The carnage Juno from the skies survey'd,
And touch'd with grief bespoke the blue-eyed maid:
"Oh, sight accursed! Shall faithless Troy prevail,
And shall our promise to our people fail?
How vain the word to Menelaus given
By Jove's great daughter and the queen of heaven,
Beneath his arms that Priam's towers should fall,
If warring gods for ever guard the wall!
Mars, red with slaughter, aids our hated foes:
Haste, let us arm, and force with force oppose!"

She spoke; Minerva burns to meet the war:
And now heaven's empress calls her blazing car.
At her command rush forth the steeds divine;
Rich with immortal gold their trappings shine.
Bright Hebe waits; by Hebe, ever young,
The whirling wheels are to the chariot hung.
On the bright axle turns the bidden wheel
Of sounding brass; the polished axle steel.
Eight brazen spokes in radiant order flame;
The circles gold, of uncorrupted frame,
Such as the heavens produce: and round the gold
Two brazen rings of work divine were roll'd.
The bossy naves of sold silver shone;
Braces of gold suspend the moving throne:
The car, behind, an arching figure bore;
The bending concave form'd an arch before.
Silver the beam, the extended yoke was gold,
And golden reins the immortal coursers hold.
Herself, impatient, to the ready car,
The coursers joins, and breathes revenge and war.

Pallas disrobes; her radiant veil untied,
With flowers adorn'd, with art diversified,
(The laboured veil her heavenly fingers wove,)
Flows on the pavement of the court of Jove.
Now heaven's dread arms her mighty limbs invest,
Jove's cuirass blazes on her ample breast;
Deck'd in sad triumph for the mournful field,
O'er her broad shoulders hangs his horrid shield,
Dire, black, tremendous! Round the margin roll'd,
A fringe of serpents hissing guards the gold:
Here all the terrors of grim War appear,
Here rages Force, here tremble Flight and Fear,
Here storm'd Contention, and here Fury frown'd,
And the dire orb portentous Gorgon crown'd.
The massy golden helm she next assumes,
That dreadful nods with four o'ershading plumes;
So vast, the broad circumference contains
A hundred armies on a hundred plains.
The goddess thus the imperial car ascends;
Shook by her arm the mighty javelin bends,
Ponderous and huge; that when her fury burns,
Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts o'erturns.

Swift at the scourge the ethereal coursers fly,
While the smooth chariot cuts the liquid sky.
Heaven's gates spontaneous open to the powers,
Heaven's golden gates, kept by the winged Hours;
Commission'd in alternate watch they stand,
The sun's bright portals and the skies command,
Involve in clouds the eternal gates of day,
Or the dark barrier roll with ease away.
The sounding hinges ring on either side
The gloomy volumes, pierced with light, divide.
The chariot mounts, where deep in ambient skies,
Confused, Olympus' hundred heads arise;
Where far apart the Thunderer fills his throne,
O'er all the gods superior and alone.
There with her snowy hand the queen restrains
The fiery steeds, and thus to Jove complains:

"O sire! can no resentment touch thy soul?
Can Mars rebel, and does no thunder roll?
What lawless rage on yon forbidden plain,
What rash destruction! and what heroes slain!
Venus, and Phoebus with the dreadful bow,
Smile on the slaughter, and enjoy my woe.
Mad, furious power! whose unrelenting mind
No god can govern, and no justice bind.
Say, mighty father! shall we scourge this pride,
And drive from fight the impetuous homicide?"

To whom assenting, thus the Thunderer said:
"Go! and the great Minerva be thy aid.
To tame the monster-god Minerva knows,
And oft afflicts his brutal breast with woes."

He said; Saturnia, ardent to obey,
Lash'd her white steeds along the aerial way
Swift down the steep of heaven the chariot rolls,
Between the expanded earth and starry poles
Far as a shepherd, from some point on high,
O'er the wide main extends his boundless eye,
Through such a space of air, with thundering sound,
At every leap the immortal coursers bound
Troy now they reach'd and touch'd those banks divine,
Where silver Simois and Scamander join
There Juno stopp'd, and (her fair steeds unloosed)
Of air condensed a vapour circumfused
For these, impregnate with celestial dew,
On Simois, brink ambrosial herbage grew.
Thence to relieve the fainting Argive throng,
Smooth as the sailing doves they glide along.

The best and bravest of the Grecian band
(A warlike circle) round Tydides stand.
Such was their look as lions bathed in blood,
Or foaming boars, the terror of the wood
Heaven's empress mingles with the mortal crowd,
And shouts, in Stentor's sounding voice, aloud;
Stentor the strong, endued with brazen lungs,
Whose throats surpass'd the force of fifty tongues.

"Inglorious Argives! to your race a shame,
And only men in figure and in name!
Once from the walls your timorous foes engaged,
While fierce in war divine Achilles raged;
Now issuing fearless they possess the plain,
Now win the shores, and scarce the seas remain."

Her speech new fury to their hearts convey'd;
While near Tydides stood the Athenian maid;
The king beside his panting steeds she found,
O'erspent with toil reposing on the ground;
To cool his glowing wound he sat apart,
(The wound inflicted by the Lycian dart.)
Large drops of sweat from all his limbs descend,
Beneath his ponderous shield his sinews bend,
Whose ample belt, that o'er his shoulder lay,
He eased; and wash'd the clotted gore away.
The goddess leaning o'er the bending yoke,
Beside his coursers, thus her silence broke:

"Degenerate prince! and not of Tydeus' kind,
Whose little body lodged a mighty mind;
Foremost he press'd in glorious toils to share,
And scarce refrain'd when I forbade the war.
Alone, unguarded, once he dared to go,
And feast, incircled by the Theban foe;
There braved, and vanquish'd, many a hardy knight;
Such nerves I gave him, and such force in fight.
Thou too no less hast been my constant care;
Thy hands I arm'd, and sent thee forth to war:
But thee or fear deters, or sloth detains;
No drop of all thy father warms thy veins."

The chief thus answered mild: "Immortal maid!
I own thy presence, and confess thy aid.
Not fear, thou know'st, withholds me from the plains,
Nor sloth hath seized me, but thy word restrains:
From warring gods thou bad'st me turn my spear,
And Venus only found resistance here.
Hence, goddess! heedful of thy high commands,
Loth I gave way, and warn'd our Argive bands:
For Mars, the homicide, these eyes beheld,
With slaughter red, and raging round the field."

Then thus Minerva:--"Brave Tydides, hear!
Not Mars himself, nor aught immortal, fear.
Full on the god impel thy foaming horse:
Pallas commands, and Pallas lends thee force.
Rash, furious, blind, from these to those he flies,
And every side of wavering combat tries;
Large promise makes, and breaks the promise made:
Now gives the Grecians, now the Trojans aid."

She said, and to the steeds approaching near,
Drew from his seat the martial charioteer.
The vigorous power the trembling car ascends,
Fierce for revenge; and Diomed attends:
The groaning axle bent beneath the load;
So great a hero, and so great a god.
She snatch'd the reins, she lash'd with all her force,
And full on Mars impelled the foaming horse:
But first, to hide her heavenly visage, spread
Black Orcus' helmet o'er her radiant head.

Just then gigantic Periphas lay slain,
The strongest warrior of the tolian train;
The god, who slew him, leaves his prostrate prize
Stretch'd where he fell, and at Tydides flies.
Now rushing fierce, in equal arms appear
The daring Greek, the dreadful god of war!
Full at the chief, above his courser's head,
From Mars's arm the enormous weapon fled:
Pallas opposed her hand, and caused to glance
Far from the car the strong immortal lance.
Then threw the force of Tydeus' warlike son;
The javelin hiss'd; the goddess urged it on:
Where the broad cincture girt his armour round,
It pierced the god: his groin received the wound.
From the rent skin the warrior tugs again
The smoking steel. Mars bellows with the pain:
Loud as the roar encountering armies yield,
When shouting millions shake the thundering field.
Both armies start, and trembling gaze around;
And earth and heaven re-bellow to the sound.
As vapours blown by Auster's sultry breath,
Pregnant with plagues, and shedding seeds of death,
Beneath the rage of burning Sirius rise,
Choke the parch'd earth, and blacken all the skies;
In such a cloud the god from combat driven,
High o'er the dusky whirlwind scales the heaven.
Wild with his pain, he sought the bright abodes,
There sullen sat beneath the sire of gods,
Show'd the celestial blood, and with a groan
Thus pour'd his plaints before the immortal throne:

"Can Jove, supine, flagitious facts survey,
And brook the furies of this daring day?
For mortal men celestial powers engage,
And gods on gods exert eternal rage:
From thee, O father! all these ills we bear,
And thy fell daughter with the shield and spear;
Thou gavest that fury to the realms of light,
Pernicious, wild, regardless of the right.
All heaven beside reveres thy sovereign sway,
Thy voice we hear, and thy behests obey:
'Tis hers to offend, and even offending share
Thy breast, thy counsels, thy distinguish'd care:
So boundless she, and thou so partial grown,
Well may we deem the wondrous birth thy own.
Now frantic Diomed, at her command,
Against the immortals lifts his raging hand:
The heavenly Venus first his fury found,
Me next encountering, me he dared to wound;
Vanquish'd I fled; even I, the god of fight,
From mortal madness scarce was saved by flight.
Else hadst thou seen me sink on yonder plain,
Heap'd round, and heaving under loads of slain!
Or pierced with Grecian darts, for ages lie,
Condemn'd to pain, though fated not to die."

Him thus upbraiding, with a wrathful look
The lord of thunders view'd, and stern bespoke:
"To me, perfidious! this lamenting strain?
Of lawless force shall lawless Mars complain?
Of all the gods who tread the spangled skies,
Thou most unjust, most odious in our eyes!
Inhuman discord is thy dire delight,
The waste of slaughter, and the rage of fight.
No bounds, no law, thy fiery temper quells,
And all thy mother in thy soul rebels.
In vain our threats, in vain our power we use;
She gives the example, and her son pursues.
Yet long the inflicted pangs thou shall not mourn,
Sprung since thou art from Jove, and heavenly-born.
Else, singed with lightning, hadst thou hence been thrown,
Where chain'd on burning rocks the Titans groan."

Thus he who shakes Olympus with his nod;
Then gave to Paeon's care the bleeding god.
With gentle hand the balm he pour'd around,
And heal'd the immortal flesh, and closed the wound.
As when the fig's press'd juice, infused in cream,
To curds coagulates the liquid stream,
Sudden the fluids fix the parts combined;
Such, and so soon, the ethereal texture join'd.
Cleansed from the dust and gore, fair Hebe dress'd
His mighty limbs in an immortal vest.
Glorious he sat, in majesty restored,
Fast by the throne of heaven's superior lord.
Juno and Pallas mount the bless'd abodes,
Their task perform'd, and mix among the gods.

Now heaven forsakes the fight: the immortals yield
To human force and human skill the field:
Dark showers of javelins fly from foes to foes;
Now here, now there, the tide of combat flows;
While Troy's famed streams, that bound the deathful plain
On either side, run purple to the main.

Great Ajax first to conquest led the way,
Broke the thick ranks, and turn'd the doubtful day.
The Thracian Acamas his falchion found,
And hew'd the enormous giant to the ground;
His thundering arm a deadly stroke impress'd
Where the black horse-hair nodded o'er his crest;
Fix'd in his front the brazen weapon lies,
And seals in endless shades his swimming eyes.
Next Teuthras' son distain'd the sands with blood,
Axylus, hospitable, rich, and good:
In fair Arisbe's walls (his native place)
He held his seat! a friend to human race.
Fast by the road, his ever-open door
Obliged the wealthy, and relieved the poor.
To stern Tydides now he falls a prey,
No friend to guard him in the dreadful day!
Breathless the good man fell, and by his side
His faithful servant, old Calesius died.

By great Euryalus was Dresus slain,
And next he laid Opheltius on the plain.
Two twins were near, bold, beautiful, and young,
From a fair naiad and Bucolion sprung:
(Laomedon's white flocks Bucolion fed,
That monarch's first-born by a foreign bed;
In secret woods he won the naiad's grace,
And two fair infants crown'd his strong embrace:)
Here dead they lay in all their youthful charms;
The ruthless victor stripp'd their shining arms.

Astyalus by Polypoetes fell;
Ulysses' spear Pidytes sent to hell;
By Teucer's shaft brave Aretaon bled,
And Nestor's son laid stern Ablerus dead;
Great Agamemnon, leader of the brave,
The mortal wound of rich Elatus gave,
Who held in Pedasus his proud abode,
And till'd the banks where silver Satnio flow'd.
Melanthius by Eurypylus was slain;
And Phylacus from Leitus flies in vain.

Unbless'd Adrastus next at mercy lies
Beneath the Spartan spear, a living prize.
Scared with the din and tumult of the fight,
His headlong steeds, precipitate in flight,
Rush'd on a tamarisk's strong trunk, and broke
The shatter'd chariot from the crooked yoke;
Wide o'er the field, resistless as the wind,
For Troy they fly, and leave their lord behind.
Prone on his face he sinks beside the wheel:
Atrides o'er him shakes his vengeful steel;
The fallen chief in suppliant posture press'd
The victor's knees, and thus his prayer address'd:

"O spare my youth, and for the life I owe
Large gifts of price my father shall bestow.
When fame shall tell, that, not in battle slain,
Thy hollow ships his captive son detain:
Rich heaps of brass shall in thy tent be told,
And steel well-temper'd, and persuasive gold."

He said: compassion touch'd the hero's heart
He stood, suspended with the lifted dart:
As pity pleaded for his vanquish'd prize,
Stern Agamemnon swift to vengeance flies,
And, furious, thus: "Oh impotent of mind!
Shall these, shall these Atrides' mercy find?
Well hast thou known proud Troy's perfidious land,
And well her natives merit at thy hand!
Not one of all the race, nor sex, nor age,
Shall save a Trojan from our boundless rage:
Ilion shall perish whole, and bury all;
Her babes, her infants at the breast, shall fall;
A dreadful lesson of exampled fate,
To warn the nations, and to curb the great!"

The monarch spoke; the words, with warmth address'd,
To rigid justice steel'd his brother's breast
Fierce from his knees the hapless chief he thrust;
The monarch's javelin stretch'd him in the dust,
Then pressing with his foot his panting heart,
Forth from the slain he tugg'd the reeking dart.
Old Nestor saw, and roused the warrior's rage;
"Thus, heroes! thus the vigorous combat wage;
No son of Mars descend, for servile gains,
To touch the booty, while a foe remains.
Behold yon glittering host, your future spoil!
First gain the conquest, then reward the toil."

And now had Greece eternal fame acquired,
And frighted Troy within her walls, retired,
Had not sage Helenus her state redress'd,
Taught by the gods that moved his sacred breast.
Where Hector stood, with great neas join'd,
The seer reveal'd the counsels of his mind:

"Ye generous chiefs! on whom the immortals lay
The cares and glories of this doubtful day;
On whom your aids, your country's hopes depend;
Wise to consult, and active to defend!
Here, at our gates, your brave efforts unite,
Turn back the routed, and forbid the flight,
Ere yet their wives' soft arms the cowards gain,
The sport and insult of the hostile train.
When your commands have hearten'd every band,
Ourselves, here fix'd, will make the dangerous stand;
Press'd as we are, and sore of former fight,
These straits demand our last remains of might.
Meanwhile thou, Hector, to the town retire,
And teach our mother what the gods require:
Direct the queen to lead the assembled train
Of Troy's chief matrons to Minerva's fane;
Unbar the sacred gates, and seek the power,
With offer'd vows, in Ilion's topmost tower.
The largest mantle her rich wardrobes hold,
Most prized for art, and labour'd o'er with gold,
Before the goddess' honour'd knees be spread,
And twelve young heifers to her altars led:
If so the power, atoned by fervent prayer,
Our wives, our infants, and our city spare,
And far avert Tydides' wasteful ire,
That mows whole troops, and makes all Troy retire;
Not thus Achilles taught our hosts to dread,
Sprung though he was from more than mortal bed;
Not thus resistless ruled the stream of fight,
In rage unbounded, and unmatch'd in might."

Hector obedient heard: and, with a bound,
Leap'd from his trembling chariot to the ground;
Through all his host inspiring force he flies,
And bids the thunder of the battle rise.
With rage recruited the bold Trojans glow,
And turn the tide of conflict on the foe:
Fierce in the front he shakes two dazzling spears;
All Greece recedes, and 'midst her triumphs fears;
Some god, they thought, who ruled the fate of wars,
Shot down avenging from the vault of stars.

Then thus aloud: "Ye dauntless Dardans, hear!
And you whom distant nations send to war!
Be mindful of the strength your fathers bore;
Be still yourselves, and Hector asks no more.
One hour demands me in the Trojan wall,
To bid our altars flame, and victims fall:
Nor shall, I trust, the matrons' holy train,
And reverend elders, seek the gods in vain."

This said, with ample strides the hero pass'd;
The shield's large orb behind his shoulder cast,
His neck o'ershading, to his ankle hung;
And as he march'd the brazen buckler rung.

Now paused the battle (godlike Hector gone),
Where daring Glaucus and great Tydeus' son
Between both armies met: the chiefs from far
Observed each other, and had mark'd for war.
Near as they drew, Tydides thus began:

"What art thou, boldest of the race of man?
Our eyes till now that aspect ne'er beheld,
Where fame is reap'd amid the embattled field;
Yet far before the troops thou dar'st appear,
And meet a lance the fiercest heroes fear.
Unhappy they, and born of luckless sires,
Who tempt our fury when Minerva fires!
But if from heaven, celestial, thou descend,
Know with immortals we no more contend.
Not long Lycurgus view'd the golden light,
That daring man who mix'd with gods in fight.
Bacchus, and Bacchus' votaries, he drove,
With brandish'd steel, from Nyssa's sacred grove:
Their consecrated spears lay scatter'd round,
With curling vines and twisted ivy bound;
While Bacchus headlong sought the briny flood,
And Thetis' arms received the trembling god.
Nor fail'd the crime the immortals' wrath to move;
(The immortals bless'd with endless ease above;)
Deprived of sight by their avenging doom,
Cheerless he breathed, and wander'd in the gloom,
Then sunk unpitied to the dire abodes,
A wretch accursed, and hated by the gods!
I brave not heaven: but if the fruits of earth
Sustain thy life, and human be thy birth,
Bold as thou art, too prodigal of breath,
Approach, and enter the dark gates of death."

"What, or from whence I am, or who my sire,
(Replied the chief,) can Tydeus' son inquire?
Like leaves on trees the race of man is found,
Now green in youth, now withering on the ground;
Another race the following spring supplies;
They fall successive, and successive rise:
So generations in their course decay;
So flourish these, when those are pass'd away.
But if thou still persist to search my birth,
Then hear a tale that fills the spacious earth.

"A city stands on Argos' utmost bound,
(Argos the fair, for warlike steeds renown'd,)
Aeolian Sisyphus, with wisdom bless'd,
In ancient time the happy wall possess'd,
Then call'd Ephyre: Glaucus was his son;
Great Glaucus, father of Bellerophon,
Who o'er the sons of men in beauty shined,
Loved for that valour which preserves mankind.
Then mighty Praetus Argos' sceptre sway'd,
Whose hard commands Bellerophon obey'd.
With direful jealousy the monarch raged,
And the brave prince in numerous toils engaged.
For him Antaea burn'd with lawless flame,
And strove to tempt him from the paths of fame:
In vain she tempted the relentless youth,
Endued with wisdom, sacred fear, and truth.
Fired at his scorn the queen to Praetus fled,
And begg'd revenge for her insulted bed:
Incensed he heard, resolving on his fate;
But hospitable laws restrain'd his hate:
To Lycia the devoted youth he sent,
With tablets seal'd, that told his dire intent.
Now bless'd by every power who guards the good,
The chief arrived at Xanthus' silver flood:
There Lycia's monarch paid him honours due,
Nine days he feasted, and nine bulls he slew.
But when the tenth bright morning orient glow'd,
The faithful youth his monarch's mandate show'd:
The fatal tablets, till that instant seal'd,
The deathful secret to the king reveal'd.
First, dire Chimaera's conquest was enjoin'd;
A mingled monster of no mortal kind!
Behind, a dragon's fiery tail was spread;
A goat's rough body bore a lion's head;
Her pitchy nostrils flaky flames expire;
Her gaping throat emits infernal fire.

"This pest he slaughter'd, (for he read the skies,
And trusted heaven's informing prodigies,)
Then met in arms the Solymaean crew,
(Fiercest of men,) and those the warrior slew;
Next the bold Amazons' whole force defied;
And conquer'd still, for heaven was on his side.

"Nor ended here his toils: his Lycian foes,
At his return, a treacherous ambush rose,
With levell'd spears along the winding shore:
There fell they breathless, and return'd no more.

"At length the monarch, with repentant grief,
Confess'd the gods, and god-descended chief;
His daughter gave, the stranger to detain,
With half the honours of his ample reign:
The Lycians grant a chosen space of ground,
With woods, with vineyards, and with harvests crown'd.
There long the chief his happy lot possess'd,
With two brave sons and one fair daughter bless'd;
(Fair e'en in heavenly eyes: her fruitful love
Crown'd with Sarpedon's birth the embrace of Jove;)
But when at last, distracted in his mind,
Forsook by heaven, forsaking humankind,
Wide o'er the Aleian field he chose to stray,
A long, forlorn, uncomfortable way!
Woes heap'd on woes consumed his wasted heart:
His beauteous daughter fell by Phoebe's dart;
His eldest born by raging Mars was slain,
In combat on the Solymaean plain.
Hippolochus survived: from him I came,
The honour'd author of my birth and name;
By his decree I sought the Trojan town;
By his instructions learn to win renown,
To stand the first in worth as in command,
To add new honours to my native land,
Before my eyes my mighty sires to place,
And emulate the glories of our race."

He spoke, and transport fill'd Tydides' heart;
In earth the generous warrior fix'd his dart,
Then friendly, thus the Lycian prince address'd:
"Welcome, my brave hereditary guest!
Thus ever let us meet, with kind embrace,
Nor stain the sacred friendship of our race.
Know, chief, our grandsires have been guests of old;
Oeneus the strong, Bellerophon the bold:
Our ancient seat his honour'd presence graced,
Where twenty days in genial rites he pass'd.
The parting heroes mutual presents left;
A golden goblet was thy grandsire's gift;
Oeneus a belt of matchless work bestowed,
That rich with Tyrian dye refulgent glow'd.
(This from his pledge I learn'd, which, safely stored
Among my treasures, still adorns my board:
For Tydeus left me young, when Thebe's wall
Beheld the sons of Greece untimely fall.)
Mindful of this, in friendship let us join;
If heaven our steps to foreign lands incline,
My guest in Argos thou, and I in Lycia thine.
Enough of Trojans to this lance shall yield,
In the full harvest of yon ample field;
Enough of Greeks shall dye thy spear with gore;
But thou and Diomed be foes no more.
Now change we arms, and prove to either host
We guard the friendship of the line we boast."

Thus having said, the gallant chiefs alight,
Their hands they join, their mutual faith they plight;
Brave Glaucus then each narrow thought resign'd,
(Jove warm'd his bosom, and enlarged his mind,)
For Diomed's brass arms, of mean device,
For which nine oxen paid, (a vulgar price,)
He gave his own, of gold divinely wrought,
A hundred beeves the shining purchase bought.

Meantime the guardian of the Trojan state,
Great Hector, enter'd at the Scaean gate.
Beneath the beech-tree's consecrated shades,
The Trojan matrons and the Trojan maids
Around him flock'd, all press'd with pious care
For husbands, brothers, sons, engaged in war.
He bids the train in long procession go,
And seek the gods, to avert the impending woe.
And now to Priam's stately courts he came,
Rais'd on arch'd columns of stupendous frame;
O'er these a range of marble structure runs,
The rich pavilions of his fifty sons,
In fifty chambers lodged: and rooms of state,
Opposed to those, where Priam's daughters sate.
Twelve domes for them and their loved spouses shone,
Of equal beauty, and of polish'd stone.
Hither great Hector pass'd, nor pass'd unseen
Of royal Hecuba, his mother-queen.
(With her Laodice, whose beauteous face
Surpass'd the nymphs of Troy's illustrious race.)
Long in a strict embrace she held her son,
And press'd his hand, and tender thus begun:

"O Hector! say, what great occasion calls
My son from fight, when Greece surrounds our walls;
Com'st thou to supplicate the almighty power
With lifted hands, from Ilion's lofty tower?
Stay, till I bring the cup with Bacchus crown'd,
In Jove's high name, to sprinkle on the ground,
And pay due vows to all the gods around.
Then with a plenteous draught refresh thy soul,
And draw new spirits from the generous bowl;
Spent as thou art with long laborious fight,
The brave defender of thy country's right."

"Far hence be Bacchus' gifts; (the chief rejoin'd;)
Inflaming wine, pernicious to mankind,
Unnerves the limbs, and dulls the noble mind.
Let chiefs abstain, and spare the sacred juice
To sprinkle to the gods, its better use.
By me that holy office were profaned;
Ill fits it me, with human gore distain'd,
To the pure skies these horrid hands to raise,
Or offer heaven's great Sire polluted praise.
You, with your matrons, go! a spotless train,
And burn rich odours in Minerva's fane.
The largest mantle your full wardrobes hold,
Most prized for art, and labour'd o'er with gold,
Before the goddess' honour'd knees be spread,
And twelve young heifers to her altar led.
So may the power, atoned by fervent prayer,
Our wives, our infants, and our city spare;
And far avert Tydides' wasteful ire,
Who mows whole troops, and makes all Troy retire.
Be this, O mother, your religious care:
I go to rouse soft Paris to the war;
If yet not lost to all the sense of shame,
The recreant warrior hear the voice of fame.
Oh, would kind earth the hateful wretch embrace,
That pest of Troy, that ruin of our race!
Deep to the dark abyss might he descend,
Troy yet should flourish, and my sorrows end."

This heard, she gave command: and summon'd came
Each noble matron and illustrious dame.
The Phrygian queen to her rich wardrobe went,
Where treasured odours breathed a costly scent.
There lay the vestures of no vulgar art,
Sidonian maids embroider'd every part,
Whom from soft Sidon youthful Paris bore,
With Helen touching on the Tyrian shore.
Here, as the queen revolved with careful eyes
The various textures and the various dyes,
She chose a veil that shone superior far,
And glow'd refulgent as the morning star.
Herself with this the long procession leads;
The train majestically slow proceeds.
Soon as to Ilion's topmost tower they come,
And awful reach the high Palladian dome,
Antenor's consort, fair Theano, waits
As Pallas' priestess, and unbars the gates.
With hands uplifted and imploring eyes,
They fill the dome with supplicating cries.
The priestess then the shining veil displays,
Placed on Minerva's knees, and thus she prays:

"Oh awful goddess! ever-dreadful maid,
Troy's strong defence, unconquer'd Pallas, aid!
Break thou Tydides' spear, and let him fall
Prone on the dust before the Trojan wall!
So twelve young heifers, guiltless of the yoke,
Shall fill thy temple with a grateful smoke.
But thou, atoned by penitence and prayer,
Ourselves, our infants, and our city spare!"
So pray'd the priestess in her holy fane;
So vow'd the matrons, but they vow'd in vain.

While these appear before the power with prayers,
Hector to Paris' lofty dome repairs.
Himself the mansion raised, from every part
Assembling architects of matchless art.
Near Priam's court and Hector's palace stands
The pompous structure, and the town commands.
A spear the hero bore of wondrous strength,
Of full ten cubits was the lance's length,
The steely point with golden ringlets join'd,
Before him brandish'd, at each motion shined
Thus entering, in the glittering rooms he found
His brother-chief, whose useless arms lay round,
His eyes delighting with their splendid show,
Brightening the shield, and polishing the bow.
Beside him Helen with her virgins stands,
Guides their rich labours, and instructs their hands.

Him thus inactive, with an ardent look
The prince beheld, and high-resenting spoke.
"Thy hate to Troy, is this the time to show?
(O wretch ill-fated, and thy country's foe!)
Paris and Greece against us both conspire,
Thy close resentment, and their vengeful ire.
For thee great Ilion's guardian heroes fall,
Till heaps of dead alone defend her wall,
For thee the soldier bleeds, the matron mourns,
And wasteful war in all its fury burns.
Ungrateful man! deserves not this thy care,
Our troops to hearten, and our toils to share?
Rise, or behold the conquering flames ascend,
And all the Phrygian glories at an end."

"Brother, 'tis just, (replied the beauteous youth,)
Thy free remonstrance proves thy worth and truth:
Yet charge my absence less, O generous chief!
On hate to Troy, than conscious shame and grief:
Here, hid from human eyes, thy brother sate,
And mourn'd, in secret, his and Ilion's fate.
'Tis now enough; now glory spreads her charms,
And beauteous Helen calls her chief to arms.
Conquest to-day my happier sword may bless,
'Tis man's to fight, but heaven's to give success.
But while I arm, contain thy ardent mind;
Or go, and Paris shall not lag behind."

He said, nor answer'd Priam's warlike son;
When Helen thus with lowly grace begun:

"Oh, generous brother! (if the guilty dame
That caused these woes deserve a sister's name!)
Would heaven, ere all these dreadful deeds were done,
The day that show'd me to the golden sun
Had seen my death! why did not whirlwinds bear
The fatal infant to the fowls of air?
Why sunk I not beneath the whelming tide,
And midst the roarings of the waters died?
Heaven fill'd up all my ills, and I accursed
Bore all, and Paris of those ills the worst.
Helen at least a braver spouse might claim,
Warm'd with some virtue, some regard of fame!
Now tired with toils, thy fainting limbs recline,
With toils, sustain'd for Paris' sake and mine
The gods have link'd our miserable doom,
Our present woe, and infamy to come:
Wide shall it spread, and last through ages long,
Example sad! and theme of future song."

The chief replied: "This time forbids to rest;
The Trojan bands, by hostile fury press'd,
Demand their Hector, and his arm require;
The combat urges, and my soul's on fire.
Urge thou thy knight to march where glory calls,
And timely join me, ere I leave the walls.
Ere yet I mingle in the direful fray,
My wife, my infant, claim a moment's stay;
This day (perhaps the last that sees me here)
Demands a parting word, a tender tear:
This day, some god who hates our Trojan land
May vanquish Hector by a Grecian hand."

He said, and pass'd with sad presaging heart
To seek his spouse, his soul's far dearer part;
At home he sought her, but he sought in vain;
She, with one maid of all her menial train,
Had hence retired; and with her second joy,
The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy,
Pensive she stood on Ilion's towery height,
Beheld the war, and sicken'd at the sight;
There her sad eyes in vain her lord explore,
Or weep the wounds her bleeding country bore.

But he who found not whom his soul desired,
Whose virtue charm'd him as her beauty fired,
Stood in the gates, and ask'd "what way she bent
Her parting step? If to the fane she went,
Where late the mourning matrons made resort;
Or sought her sisters in the Trojan court?"
"Not to the court, (replied the attendant train,)
Nor mix'd with matrons to Minerva's fane:
To Ilion's steepy tower she bent her way,
To mark the fortunes of the doubtful day.
Troy fled, she heard, before the Grecian sword;
She heard, and trembled for her absent lord:
Distracted with surprise, she seem'd to fly,
Fear on her cheek, and sorrow m her eye.
The nurse attended with her infant boy,
The young Astyanax, the hope of Troy."

Hector this heard, return'd without delay;
Swift through the town he trod his former way,
Through streets of palaces, and walks of state;
And met the mourner at the Scaean gate.
With haste to meet him sprung the joyful fair.
His blameless wife, Aetion's wealthy heir:
(Cilician Thebe great Aetion sway'd,
And Hippoplacus' wide extended shade:)
The nurse stood near, in whose embraces press'd,
His only hope hung smiling at her breast,
Whom each soft charm and early grace adorn,
Fair as the new-born star that gilds the morn.
To this loved infant Hector gave the name
Scamandrius, from Scamander's honour'd stream;
Astyanax the Trojans call'd the boy,
From his great father, the defence of Troy.
Silent the warrior smiled, and pleased resign'd
To tender passions all his mighty mind;
His beauteous princess cast a mournful look,
Hung on his hand, and then dejected spoke;
Her bosom laboured with a boding sigh,
And the big tear stood trembling in her eye.

"Too daring prince! ah, whither dost thou run?
Ah, too forgetful of thy wife and son!
And think'st thou not how wretched we shall be,
A widow I, a helpless orphan he?
For sure such courage length of life denies,
And thou must fall, thy virtue's sacrifice.
Greece in her single heroes strove in vain;
Now hosts oppose thee, and thou must be slain.
O grant me, gods, ere Hector meets his doom,
All I can ask of heaven, an early tomb!
So shall my days in one sad tenor run,
And end with sorrows as they first begun.
No parent now remains my griefs to share,
No father's aid, no mother's tender care.
The fierce Achilles wrapt our walls in fire,
Laid Thebe waste, and slew my warlike sire!
His fate compassion in the victor bred;
Stern as he was, he yet revered the dead,
His radiant arms preserved from hostile spoil,
And laid him decent on the funeral pile;
Then raised a mountain where his bones were burn'd,
The mountain-nymphs the rural tomb adorn'd,
Jove's sylvan daughters bade their elms bestow
A barren shade, and in his honour grow.

"By the same arm my seven brave brothers fell;
In one sad day beheld the gates of hell;
While the fat herds and snowy flocks they fed,
Amid their fields the hapless heroes bled!
My mother lived to wear the victor's bands,
The queen of Hippoplacia's sylvan lands:
Redeem'd too late, she scarce beheld again
Her pleasing empire and her native plain,
When ah! oppress'd by life-consuming woe,
She fell a victim to Diana's bow.

"Yet while my Hector still survives, I see
My father, mother, brethren, all, in thee:
Alas! my parents, brothers, kindred, all
Once more will perish, if my Hector fall,
Thy wife, thy infant, in thy danger share:
Oh, prove a husband's and a father's care!
That quarter most the skilful Greeks annoy,
Where yon wild fig-trees join the wall of Troy;
Thou, from this tower defend the important post;
There Agamemnon points his dreadful host,
That pass Tydides, Ajax, strive to gain,
And there the vengeful Spartan fires his train.
Thrice our bold foes the fierce attack have given,
Or led by hopes, or dictated from heaven.
Let others in the field their arms employ,
But stay my Hector here, and guard his Troy."

The chief replied: "That post shall be my care,
Not that alone, but all the works of war.
How would the sons of Troy, in arms renown'd,
And Troy's proud dames, whose garments sweep the ground
Attaint the lustre of my former name,
Should Hector basely quit the field of fame?
My early youth was bred to martial pains,
My soul impels me to the embattled plains!
Let me be foremost to defend the throne,
And guard my father's glories, and my own.

"Yet come it will, the day decreed by fates!
(How my heart trembles while my tongue relates!)
The day when thou, imperial Troy! must bend,
And see thy warriors fall, thy glories end.
And yet no dire presage so wounds my mind,
My mother's death, the ruin of my kind,
Not Priam's hoary hairs defiled with gore,
Not all my brothers gasping on the shore;
As thine, Andromache! Thy griefs I dread:
I see thee trembling, weeping, captive led!
In Argive looms our battles to design,
And woes, of which so large a part was thine!
To bear the victor's hard commands, or bring
The weight of waters from Hyperia's spring.
There while you groan beneath the load of life,
They cry, 'Behold the mighty Hector's wife!'
Some haughty Greek, who lives thy tears to see,
Imbitters all thy woes, by naming me.
The thoughts of glory past, and present shame,
A thousand griefs shall waken at the name!
May I lie cold before that dreadful day,
Press'd with a load of monumental clay!
Thy Hector, wrapt in everlasting sleep,
Shall neither hear thee sigh, nor see thee weep."

Thus having spoke, the illustrious chief of Troy
Stretch'd his fond arms to clasp the lovely boy.
The babe clung crying to his nurse's breast,
Scared at the dazzling helm, and nodding crest.
With secret pleasure each fond parent smiled,
And Hector hasted to relieve his child,
The glittering terrors from his brows unbound,
And placed the beaming helmet on the ground;
Then kiss'd the child, and, lifting high in air,
Thus to the gods preferr'd a father's prayer:

"O thou! whose glory fills the ethereal throne,
And all ye deathless powers! protect my son!
Grant him, like me, to purchase just renown,
To guard the Trojans, to defend the crown,
Against his country's foes the war to wage,
And rise the Hector of the future age!
So when triumphant from successful toils
Of heroes slain he bears the reeking spoils,
Whole hosts may hail him with deserved acclaim,
And say, 'This chief transcends his father's fame:'
While pleased amidst the general shouts of Troy,
His mother's conscious heart o'erflows with joy."

He spoke, and fondly gazing on her charms,
Restored the pleasing burden to her arms;
Soft on her fragrant breast the babe she laid,
Hush'd to repose, and with a smile survey'd.
The troubled pleasure soon chastised by fear,
She mingled with a smile a tender tear.
The soften'd chief with kind compassion view'd,
And dried the falling drops, and thus pursued:

"Andromache! my soul's far better part,
Why with untimely sorrows heaves thy heart?
No hostile hand can antedate my doom,
Till fate condemns me to the silent tomb.
Fix'd is the term to all the race of earth;
And such the hard condition of our birth:
No force can then resist, no flight can save,
All sink alike, the fearful and the brave.
No more--but hasten to thy tasks at home,
There guide the spindle, and direct the loom:
Me glory summons to the martial scene,
The field of combat is the sphere for men.
Where heroes war, the foremost place I claim,
The first in danger as the first in fame."

Thus having said, the glorious chief resumes
His towery helmet, black with shading plumes.
His princess parts with a prophetic sigh,
Unwilling parts, and oft reverts her eye
That stream'd at every look; then, moving slow,
Sought her own palace, and indulged her woe.
There, while her tears deplored the godlike man,
Through all her train the soft infection ran;
The pious maids their mingled sorrows shed,
And mourn the living Hector, as the dead.

But now, no longer deaf to honour's call,
Forth issues Paris from the palace wall.
In brazen arms that cast a gleamy ray,
Swift through the town the warrior bends his way.
The wanton courser thus with reins unbound
Breaks from his stall, and beats the trembling ground;
Pamper'd and proud, he seeks the wonted tides,
And laves, in height of blood his shining sides;
His head now freed, he tosses to the skies;
His mane dishevell'd o'er his shoulders flies;
He snuffs the females in the distant plain,
And springs, exulting, to his fields again.
With equal triumph, sprightly, bold, and gay,
In arms refulgent as the god of day,
The son of Priam, glorying in his might,
Rush'd forth with Hector to the fields of fight.

And now, the warriors passing on the way,
The graceful Paris first excused his stay.
To whom the noble Hector thus replied:
"O chief! in blood, and now in arms, allied!
Thy power in war with justice none contest;
Known is thy courage, and thy strength confess'd.
What pity sloth should seize a soul so brave,
Or godlike Paris live a woman's slave!
My heart weeps blood at what the Trojans say,
And hopes thy deeds shall wipe the stain away.
Haste then, in all their glorious labours share,
For much they suffer, for thy sake, in war.
These ills shall cease, whene'er by Jove's decree
We crown the bowl to heaven and liberty:
While the proud foe his frustrate triumphs mourns,
And Greece indignant through her seas returns."

So spoke the guardian of the Trojan state,
Then rush'd impetuous through the Scaean gate.
Him Paris follow'd to the dire alarms;
Both breathing slaughter, both resolved in arms.
As when to sailors labouring through the main,
That long have heaved the weary oar in vain,
Jove bids at length the expected gales arise;
The gales blow grateful, and the vessel flies.
So welcome these to Troy's desiring train,
The bands are cheer'd, the war awakes again.

Bold Paris first the work of death begun
On great Menestheus, Areithous' son,
Sprung from the fair Philomeda's embrace,
The pleasing Arne was his native place.
Then sunk Eioneus to the shades below,
Beneath his steely casque he felt the blow
Full on his neck, from Hector's weighty hand;
And roll'd, with limbs relax'd, along the land.
By Glaucus' spear the bold Iphmous bleeds,
Fix'd in the shoulder as he mounts his steeds;
Headlong he tumbles: his slack nerves unbound,
Drop the cold useless members on the ground.

When now Minerva saw her Argives slain,
From vast Olympus to the gleaming plain
Fierce she descends: Apollo marked her flight,
Nor shot less swift from Ilion's towery height.
Radiant they met, beneath the beechen shade;
When thus Apollo to the blue-eyed maid:

"What cause, O daughter of Almighty Jove!
Thus wings thy progress from the realms above?
Once more impetuous dost thou bend thy way,
To give to Greece the long divided day?
Too much has Troy already felt thy hate,
Now breathe thy rage, and hush the stern debate;
This day, the business of the field suspend;
War soon shall kindle, and great Ilion bend;
Since vengeful goddesses confederate join
To raze her walls, though built by hands divine."

To whom the progeny of Jove replies:
"I left, for this, the council of the skies:
But who shall bid conflicting hosts forbear,
What art shall calm the furious sons of war?"
To her the god: "Great Hector's soul incite
To dare the boldest Greek to single fight,
Till Greece, provoked, from all her numbers show
A warrior worthy to be Hector's foe."

At this agreed, the heavenly powers withdrew;
Sage Helenus their secret counsels knew;
Hector, inspired, he sought: to him address'd,
Thus told the dictates of his sacred breast:
"O son of Priam! let thy faithful ear
Receive my words: thy friend and brother hear!
Go forth persuasive, and a while engage
The warring nations to suspend their rage;
Then dare the boldest of the hostile train
To mortal combat on the listed plain.
For not this day shall end thy glorious date;
The gods have spoke it, and their voice is fate."

He said: the warrior heard the word with joy;
Then with his spear restrain'd the youth of Troy,
Held by the midst athwart. On either hand
The squadrons part; the expecting Trojans stand;
Great Agamemnon bids the Greeks forbear:
They breathe, and hush the tumult of the war.
The Athenian maid, and glorious god of day,
With silent joy the settling hosts survey:
In form of vultures, on the beech's height
They sit conceal'd, and wait the future fight.

The thronging troops obscure the dusky fields,
Horrid with bristling spears, and gleaming shields.
As when a general darkness veils the main,
(Soft Zephyr curling the wide wat'ry plain,)
The waves scarce heave, the face of ocean sleeps,
And a still horror saddens all the deeps;
Thus in thick orders settling wide around,
At length composed they sit, and shade the ground.
Great Hector first amidst both armies broke
The solemn silence, and their powers bespoke:

"Hear, all ye Trojan, all ye Grecian bands,
What my soul prompts, and what some god commands.
Great Jove, averse our warfare to compose,
O'erwhelms the nations with new toils and woes;
War with a fiercer tide once more returns,
Till Ilion falls, or till yon navy burns.
You then, O princes of the Greeks! appear;
'Tis Hector speaks, and calls the gods to hear:
From all your troops select the boldest knight,
And him, the boldest, Hector dares to fight.
Here if I fall, by chance of battle slain,
Be his my spoil, and his these arms remain;
But let my body, to my friends return'd,
By Trojan hands and Trojan flames be burn'd.
And if Apollo, in whose aid I trust,
Shall stretch your daring champion in the dust;
If mine the glory to despoil the foe;
On Phoebus' temple I'll his arms bestow:
The breathless carcase to your navy sent,
Greece on the shore shall raise a monument;
Which when some future mariner surveys,
Wash'd by broad Hellespont's resounding seas,
Thus shall he say, 'A valiant Greek lies there,
By Hector slain, the mighty man of war,'
The stone shall tell your vanquish'd hero's name.
And distant ages learn the victor's fame."

This fierce defiance Greece astonish'd heard,
Blush'd to refuse, and to accept it fear'd.
Stern Menelaus first the silence broke,
And, inly groaning, thus opprobrious spoke:

"Women of Greece! O scandal of your race,
Whose coward souls your manly form disgrace,
How great the shame, when every age shall know
That not a Grecian met this noble foe!
Go then! resolve to earth, from whence ye grew,
A heartless, spiritless, inglorious crew!
Be what ye seem, unanimated clay,
Myself will dare the danger of the day;
'Tis man's bold task the generous strife to try,
But in the hands of God is victory."

These words scarce spoke, with generous ardour press'd,
His manly limbs in azure arms he dress'd.
That day, Atrides! a superior hand
Had stretch'd thee breathless on the hostile strand;
But all at once, thy fury to compose,
The kings of Greece, an awful band, arose;
Even he their chief, great Agamemnon, press'd
Thy daring hand, and this advice address'd:
"Whither, O Menelaus! wouldst thou run,
And tempt a fate which prudence bids thee shun?
Grieved though thou art, forbear the rash design;
Great Hectors arm is mightier far than thine:
Even fierce Achilles learn'd its force to fear,
And trembling met this dreadful son of war.
Sit thou secure, amidst thy social band;
Greece in our cause shall arm some powerful hand.
The mightiest warrior of the Achaian name,
Though bold and burning with desire of fame,
Content the doubtful honour might forego,
So great the danger, and so brave the foe."

He said, and turn'd his brother's vengeful mind;
He stoop'd to reason, and his rage resign'd,
No longer bent to rush on certain harms;
His joyful friends unbrace his azure arms.

He from whose lips divine persuasion flows,
Grave Nestor, then, in graceful act arose;
Thus to the kings he spoke: "What grief, what shame
Attend on Greece, and all the Grecian name!
How shall, alas! her hoary heroes mourn
Their sons degenerate, and their race a scorn!
What tears shall down thy silvery beard be roll'd,
O Peleus, old in arms, in wisdom old!
Once with what joy the generous prince would hear
Of every chief who fought this glorious war,
Participate their fame, and pleased inquire
Each name, each action, and each hero's sire!
Gods! should he see our warriors trembling stand,
And trembling all before one hostile hand;
How would he lift his aged arms on high,
Lament inglorious Greece, and beg to die!
Oh! would to all the immortal powers above,
Minerva, Phoebus, and almighty Jove!
Years might again roll back, my youth renew,
And give this arm the spring which once it knew
When fierce in war, where Jardan's waters fall,
I led my troops to Phea's trembling wall,
And with the Arcadian spears my prowess tried,
Where Celadon rolls down his rapid tide.
There Ereuthalion braved us in the field,
Proud Areithous' dreadful arms to wield;
Great Areithous, known from shore to shore
By the huge, knotted, iron mace he bore;
No lance he shook, nor bent the twanging bow,
But broke, with this, the battle of the foe.
Him not by manly force Lycurgus slew,
Whose guileful javelin from the thicket flew,
Deep in a winding way his breast assailed,
Nor aught the warrior's thundering mace avail'd.
Supine he fell: those arms which Mars before
Had given the vanquish'd, now the victor bore:
But when old age had dimm'd Lycurgus' eyes,
To Ereuthalion he consign'd the prize.
Furious with this he crush'd our levell'd bands,
And dared the trial of the strongest hands;
Nor could the strongest hands his fury stay:
All saw, and fear'd, his huge tempestuous sway
Till I, the youngest of the host, appear'd,
And, youngest, met whom all our army fear'd.
I fought the chief: my arms Minerva crown'd:
Prone fell the giant o'er a length of ground.
What then I was, O were your Nestor now!
Not Hector's self should want an equal foe.
But, warriors, you that youthful vigour boast,
The flower of Greece, the examples of our host,
Sprung from such fathers, who such numbers sway,
Can you stand trembling, and desert the day?"

His warm reproofs the listening kings inflame;
And nine, the noblest of the Grecian name,
Up-started fierce: but far before the rest
The king of men advanced his dauntless breast:
Then bold Tydides, great in arms, appear'd;
And next his bulk gigantic Ajax rear'd;
Oileus follow'd; Idomen was there,
And Merion, dreadful as the god of war:
With these Eurypylus and Thoas stand,
And wise Ulysses closed the daring band.
All these, alike inspired with noble rage,
Demand the fight. To whom the Pylian sage:

"Lest thirst of glory your brave souls divide,
What chief shall combat, let the gods decide.
Whom heaven shall choose, be his the chance to raise
His country's fame, his own immortal praise."

The lots produced, each hero signs his own:
Then in the general's helm the fates are thrown,
The people pray, with lifted eyes and hands,
And vows like these ascend from all the bands:
"Grant, thou Almighty! in whose hand is fate,
A worthy champion for the Grecian state:
This task let Ajax or Tydides prove,
Or he, the king of kings, beloved by Jove."
Old Nestor shook the casque. By heaven inspired,
Leap'd forth the lot, of every Greek desired.
This from the right to left the herald bears,
Held out in order to the Grecian peers;
Each to his rival yields the mark unknown,
Till godlike Ajax finds the lot his own;
Surveys the inscription with rejoicing eyes,
Then casts before him, and with transport cries:

"Warriors! I claim the lot, and arm with joy;
Be mine the conquest of this chief of Troy.
Now while my brightest arms my limbs invest,
To Saturn's son be all your vows address'd:
But pray in secret, lest the foes should hear,
And deem your prayers the mean effect of fear.
Said I in secret? No, your vows declare
In such a voice as fills the earth and air,
Lives there a chief whom Ajax ought to dread?
Ajax, in all the toils of battle bred!
From warlike Salamis I drew my birth,
And, born to combats, fear no force on earth."

He said. The troops with elevated eyes,
Implore the god whose thunder rends the skies:
"O father of mankind, superior lord!
On lofty Ida's holy hill adored:
Who in the highest heaven hast fix'd thy throne,
Supreme of gods! unbounded and alone:
Grant thou, that Telamon may bear away
The praise and conquest of this doubtful day;
Or, if illustrious Hector be thy care,
That both may claim it, and that both may share."

Now Ajax braced his dazzling armour on;
Sheathed in bright steel the giant-warrior shone:
He moves to combat with majestic pace;
So stalks in arms the grisly god of Thrace,
When Jove to punish faithless men prepares,
And gives whole nations to the waste of wars,
Thus march'd the chief, tremendous as a god;
Grimly he smiled; earth trembled as he strode:
His massy javelin quivering in his hand,
He stood, the bulwark of the Grecian band.
Through every Argive heart new transport ran;
All Troy stood trembling at the mighty man:
Even Hector paused; and with new doubt oppress'd,
Felt his great heart suspended in his breast:
'Twas vain to seek retreat, and vain to fear;
Himself had challenged, and the foe drew near.

Stern Telamon behind his ample shield,
As from a brazen tower, o'erlook'd the field.
Huge was its orb, with seven thick folds o'ercast,
Of tough bull-hides; of solid brass the last,
(The work of Tychius, who in Hyle dwell'd
And in all arts of armoury excell'd,)
This Ajax bore before his manly breast,
And, threatening, thus his adverse chief address'd:

"Hector! approach my arm, and singly know
What strength thou hast, and what the Grecian foe.
Achilles shuns the fight; yet some there are,
Not void of soul, and not unskill'd in war:
Let him, unactive on the sea-beat shore,
Indulge his wrath, and aid our arms no more;
Whole troops of heroes Greece has yet to boast,
And sends thee one, a sample of her host,
Such as I am, I come to prove thy might;
No more--be sudden, and begin the fight."

"O son of Telamon, thy country's pride!
(To Ajax thus the Trojan prince replied)
Me, as a boy, or woman, wouldst thou fright,
New to the field, and trembling at the fight?
Thou meet'st a chief deserving of thy arms,
To combat born, and bred amidst alarms:
I know to shift my ground, remount the car,
Turn, charge, and answer every call of war;
To right, to left, the dexterous lance I wield,
And bear thick battle on my sounding shield
But open be our fight, and bold each blow;
I steal no conquest from a noble foe."

He said, and rising, high above the field
Whirl'd the long lance against the sevenfold shield.
Full on the brass descending from above
Through six bull-hides the furious weapon drove,
Till in the seventh it fix'd. Then Ajax threw;
Through Hector's shield the forceful javelin flew,
His corslet enters, and his garment rends,
And glancing downwards, near his flank descends.
The wary Trojan shrinks, and bending low
Beneath his buckler, disappoints the blow.
From their bored shields the chiefs their javelins drew,
Then close impetuous, and the charge renew;
Fierce as the mountain-lions bathed in blood,
Or foaming boars, the terror of the wood.
At Ajax, Hector his long lance extends;
The blunted point against the buckler bends;
But Ajax, watchful as his foe drew near,
Drove through the Trojan targe the knotty spear;
It reach'd his neck, with matchless strength impell'd!
Spouts the black gore, and dims his shining shield.
Yet ceased not Hector thus; but stooping down,
In his strong hand up-heaved a flinty stone,
Black, craggy, vast: to this his force he bends;
Full on the brazen boss the stone descends;
The hollow brass resounded with the shock:
Then Ajax seized the fragment of a rock,
Applied each nerve, and swinging round on high,
With force tempestuous, let the ruin fly;
The huge stone thundering through his buckler broke:
His slacken'd knees received the numbing stroke;
Great Hector falls extended on the field,
His bulk supporting on the shatter'd shield:
Nor wanted heavenly aid: Apollo's might
Confirm'd his sinews, and restored to fight.
And now both heroes their broad falchions drew
In flaming circles round their heads they flew;
But then by heralds' voice the word was given.
The sacred ministers of earth and heaven:
Divine Talthybius, whom the Greeks employ.
And sage Idaeus on the part of Troy,
Between the swords their peaceful sceptres rear'd;
And first Idaeus' awful voice was heard:

"Forbear, my sons! your further force to prove,
Both dear to men, and both beloved of Jove.
To either host your matchless worth is known,
Each sounds your praise, and war is all your own.
But now the Night extends her awful shade;
The goddess parts you; be the night obey'd."

To whom great Ajax his high soul express'd:
"O sage! to Hector be these words address'd.
Let him, who first provoked our chiefs to fight,
Let him demand the sanction of the night;
If first he ask'd it, I content obey,
And cease the strife when Hector shows the way."

"O first of Greeks! (his noble foe rejoin'd)
Whom heaven adorns, superior to thy kind,
With strength of body, and with worth of mind!
Now martial law commands us to forbear;
Hereafter we shall meet in glorious war,
Some future day shall lengthen out the strife,
And let the gods decide of death or life!
Since, then, the night extends her gloomy shade,
And heaven enjoins it, be the night obey'd.
Return, brave Ajax, to thy Grecian friends,
And joy the nations whom thy arm defends;
As I shall glad each chief, and Trojan wife,
Who wearies heaven with vows for Hector's life.
But let us, on this memorable day,
Exchange some gift: that Greece and Troy may say,
'Not hate, but glory, made these chiefs contend;
And each brave foe was in his soul a friend.'"

With that, a sword with stars of silver graced,
The baldric studded, and the sheath enchased,
He gave the Greek. The generous Greek bestow'd
A radiant belt that rich with purple glow'd.
Then with majestic grace they quit the plain;
This seeks the Grecian, that the Phrygian train.

The Trojan bands returning Hector wait,
And hail with joy the Champion of their state;
Escaped great Ajax, they survey him round,
Alive, unarm'd, and vigorous from his wound;
To Troy's high gates the godlike man they bear
Their present triumph, as their late despair.

But Ajax, glorying in his hardy deed,
The well-arm'd Greeks to Agamemnon lead.
A steer for sacrifice the king design'd,
Of full five years, and of the nobler kind.
The victim falls; they strip the smoking hide,
The beast they quarter, and the joints divide;
Then spread the tables, the repast prepare,
Each takes his seat, and each receives his share.
The king himself (an honorary sign)
Before great Ajax placed the mighty chine.
When now the rage of hunger was removed,
Nestor, in each persuasive art approved,
The sage whose counsels long had sway'd the rest,
In words like these his prudent thought express'd:

"How dear, O kings! this fatal day has cost,
What Greeks are perish'd! what a people lost!
What tides of blood have drench'd Scamander's shore!
What crowds of heroes sunk to rise no more!
Then hear me, chief! nor let the morrow's light
Awake thy squadrons to new toils of fight:
Some space at least permit the war to breathe,
While we to flames our slaughter'd friends bequeath,
From the red field their scatter'd bodies bear,
And nigh the fleet a funeral structure rear;
So decent urns their snowy bones may keep,
And pious children o'er their ashes weep.
Here, where on one promiscuous pile they blazed,
High o'er them all a general tomb be raised;
Next, to secure our camp and naval powers,
Raise an embattled wall, with lofty towers;
From space to space be ample gates around,
For passing chariots; and a trench profound.
So Greece to combat shall in safety go,
Nor fear the fierce incursions of the foe."
'Twas thus the sage his wholesome counsel moved;
The sceptred kings of Greece his words approved.

Meanwhile, convened at Priam's palace-gate,
The Trojan peers in nightly council sate;
A senate void of order, as of choice:
Their hearts were fearful, and confused their voice.
Antenor, rising, thus demands their ear:
"Ye Trojans, Dardans, and auxiliars, hear!
'Tis heaven the counsel of my breast inspires,
And I but move what every god requires:
Let Sparta's treasures be this hour restored,
And Argive Helen own her ancient lord.
The ties of faith, the sworn alliance, broke,
Our impious battles the just gods provoke.
As this advice ye practise, or reject,
So hope success, or dread the dire effect."

The senior spoke and sate. To whom replied
The graceful husband of the Spartan bride:
"Cold counsels, Trojan, may become thy years
But sound ungrateful in a warrior's ears:
Old man, if void of fallacy or art,
Thy words express the purpose of thy heart,
Thou, in thy time, more sound advice hast given;
But wisdom has its date, assign'd by heaven.
Then hear me, princes of the Trojan name!
Their treasures I'll restore, but not the dame;
My treasures too, for peace, I will resign;
But be this bright possession ever mine."

'Twas then, the growing discord to compose,
Slow from his seat the reverend Priam rose:
His godlike aspect deep attention drew:
He paused, and these pacific words ensue:

"Ye Trojans, Dardans, and auxiliar bands!
Now take refreshment as the hour demands;
Guard well the walls, relieve the watch of night.
Till the new sun restores the cheerful light.
Then shall our herald, to the Atrides sent,
Before their ships proclaim my son's intent.
Next let a truce be ask'd, that Troy may burn
Her slaughter'd heroes, and their bones inurn;
That done, once more the fate of war be tried,
And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide!"

The monarch spoke: the warriors snatch'd with haste
(Each at his post in arms) a short repast.
Soon as the rosy morn had waked the day,
To the black ships Idaeus bent his way;
There, to the sons of Mars, in council found,
He raised his voice: the host stood listening round.

"Ye sons of Atreus, and ye Greeks, give ear!
The words of Troy, and Troy's great monarch, hear.
Pleased may ye hear (so heaven succeed my prayers)
What Paris, author of the war, declares.
The spoils and treasures he to Ilion bore
(Oh had he perish'd ere they touch'd our shore!)
He proffers injured Greece: with large increase
Of added Trojan wealth to buy the peace.
But to restore the beauteous bride again,
This Greece demands, and Troy requests in vain.
Next, O ye chiefs! we ask a truce to burn
Our slaughter'd heroes, and their bones inurn.
That done, once more the fate of war be tried,
And whose the conquest, mighty Jove decide!"

The Greeks gave ear, but none the silence broke;
At length Tydides rose, and rising spoke:
"Oh, take not, friends! defrauded of your fame,
Their proffer'd wealth, nor even the Spartan dame.
Let conquest make them ours: fate shakes their wall,
And Troy already totters to her fall."

The admiring chiefs, and all the Grecian name,
With general shouts return'd him loud acclaim.
Then thus the king of kings rejects the peace:
"Herald! in him thou hear'st the voice of Greece
For what remains; let funeral flames be fed
With heroes' corps: I war not with the dead:
Go search your slaughtered chiefs on yonder plain,
And gratify the manes of the slain.
Be witness, Jove, whose thunder rolls on high!"
He said, and rear'd his sceptre to the sky.

To sacred Troy, where all her princes lay
To wait the event, the herald bent his way.
He came, and standing in the midst, explain'd
The peace rejected, but the truce obtain'd.
Straight to their several cares the Trojans move,
Some search the plains, some fell the sounding grove:
Nor less the Greeks, descending on the shore,
Hew'd the green forests, and the bodies bore.
And now from forth the chambers of the main,
To shed his sacred light on earth again,
Arose the golden chariot of the day,
And tipp'd the mountains with a purple ray.
In mingled throngs the Greek and Trojan train
Through heaps of carnage search'd the mournful plain.
Scarce could the friend his slaughter'd friend explore,
With dust dishonour'd, and deformed with gore.
The wounds they wash'd, their pious tears they shed,
And, laid along their cars, deplored the dead.
Sage Priam check'd their grief: with silent haste
The bodies decent on the piles were placed:
With melting hearts the cold remains they burn'd,
And, sadly slow, to sacred Troy return'd.
Nor less the Greeks their pious sorrows shed,
And decent on the pile dispose the dead;
The cold remains consume with equal care;
And slowly, sadly, to their fleet repair.
Now, ere the morn had streak'd with reddening light
The doubtful confines of the day and night,
About the dying flames the Greeks appear'd,
And round the pile a general tomb they rear'd.
Then, to secure the camp and naval powers,
They raised embattled walls with lofty towers:
From space to space were ample gates around,
For passing chariots, and a trench profound
Of large extent; and deep in earth below,
Strong piles infix'd stood adverse to the foe.

So toil'd the Greeks: meanwhile the gods above,
In shining circle round their father Jove,
Amazed beheld the wondrous works of man:
Then he, whose trident shakes the earth, began:

"What mortals henceforth shall our power adore,
Our fanes frequent, our oracles implore,
If the proud Grecians thus successful boast
Their rising bulwarks on the sea-beat coast?
See the long walls extending to the main,
No god consulted, and no victim slain!
Their fame shall fill the world's remotest ends,
Wide as the morn her golden beam extends;
While old Laomedon's divine abodes,
Those radiant structures raised by labouring gods,
Shall, razed and lost, in long oblivion sleep."
Thus spoke the hoary monarch of the deep.

The almighty Thunderer with a frown replies,
That clouds the world, and blackens half the skies:
"Strong god of ocean! thou, whose rage can make
The solid earth's eternal basis shake!
What cause of fear from mortal works could move
The meanest subject of our realms above?
Where'er the sun's refulgent rays are cast,
Thy power is honour'd, and thy fame shall last.
But yon proud work no future age shall view,
No trace remain where once the glory grew.
The sapp'd foundations by thy force shall fall,
And, whelm'd beneath the waves, drop the huge wall:
Vast drifts of sand shall change the former shore:
The ruin vanish'd, and the name no more."

Thus they in heaven: while, o'er the Grecian train,
The rolling sun descending to the main
Beheld the finish'd work. Their bulls they slew;
Back from the tents the savoury vapour flew.
And now the fleet, arrived from Lemnos' strands,
With Bacchus' blessings cheered the generous bands.
Of fragrant wines the rich Eunaeus sent
A thousant measures to the royal tent.
(Eunaeus, whom Hypsipyle of yore
To Jason, shepherd of his people, bore,)
The rest they purchased at their proper cost,
And well the plenteous freight supplied the host:
Each, in exchange, proportion'd treasures gave;
Some, brass or iron; some, an ox, or slave.
All night they feast, the Greek and Trojan powers:
Those on the fields, and these within their towers.
But Jove averse the signs of wrath display'd,
And shot red lightnings through the gloomy shade:
Humbled they stood; pale horror seized on all,
While the deep thunder shook the aerial hall.
Each pour'd to Jove before the bowl was crown'd;
And large libations drench'd the thirsty ground:
Then late, refresh'd with sleep from toils of fight,
Enjoy'd the balmy blessings of the night.

Aurora now, fair daughter of the dawn,
Sprinkled with rosy light the dewy lawn;
When Jove convened the senate of the skies,
Where high Olympus' cloudy tops arise,
The sire of gods his awful silence broke;
The heavens attentive trembled as he spoke:

"Celestial states! immortal gods! give ear,
Hear our decree, and reverence what ye hear;
The fix'd decree which not all heaven can move;
Thou, fate! fulfil it! and, ye powers, approve!
What god but enters yon forbidden field,
Who yields assistance, or but wills to yield,
Back to the skies with shame he shall be driven,
Gash'd with dishonest wounds, the scorn of heaven;
Or far, oh far, from steep Olympus thrown,
Low in the dark Tartarean gulf shall groan,
With burning chains fix'd to the brazen floors,
And lock'd by hell's inexorable doors;
As deep beneath the infernal centre hurl'd,
As from that centre to the ethereal world.
Let him who tempts me, dread those dire abodes:
And know, the Almighty is the god of gods.
League all your forces, then, ye powers above,
Join all, and try the omnipotence of Jove.
Let down our golden everlasting chain
Whose strong embrace holds heaven, and earth, and main
Strive all, of mortal and immortal birth,
To drag, by this, the Thunderer down to earth
Ye strive in vain! if I but stretch this hand,
I heave the gods, the ocean, and the land;
I fix the chain to great Olympus' height,
And the vast world hangs trembling in my sight!
For such I reign, unbounded and above;
And such are men, and gods, compared to Jove."

The all-mighty spoke, nor durst the powers reply:
A reverend horror silenced all the sky;
Trembling they stood before their sovereign's look;
At length his best-beloved, the power of wisdom, spoke:

"O first and greatest! God, by gods adored
We own thy might, our father and our lord!
But, ah! permit to pity human state:
If not to help, at least lament their fate.
From fields forbidden we submiss refrain,
With arms unaiding mourn our Argives slain;
Yet grant my counsels still their breasts may move,
Or all must perish in the wrath of Jove."

The cloud-compelling god her suit approved,
And smiled superior on his best beloved;
Then call'd his coursers, and his chariot took;
The stedfast firmament beneath them shook:
Rapt by the ethereal steeds the chariot roll'd;
Brass were their hoofs, their curling manes of gold:
Of heaven's undrossy gold the gods array,
Refulgent, flash'd intolerable day.
High on the throne he shines: his coursers fly
Between the extended earth and starry sky.
But when to Ida's topmost height he came,
(Fair nurse of fountains, and of savage game,)
Where o'er her pointed summits proudly raised,
His fane breathed odours, and his altar blazed:
There, from his radiant car, the sacred sire
Of gods and men released the steeds of fire:
Blue ambient mists the immortal steeds embraced;
High on the cloudy point his seat he placed;
Thence his broad eye the subject world surveys,
The town, and tents, and navigable seas.

Now had the Grecians snatch'd a short repast,
And buckled on their shining arms with haste.
Troy roused as soon; for on this dreadful day
The fate of fathers, wives, and infants lay.
The gates unfolding pour forth all their train;
Squadrons on squadrons cloud the dusky plain:
Men, steeds, and chariots shake the trembling ground,
The tumult thickens, and the skies resound;
And now with shouts the shocking armies closed,
To lances lances, shields to shields opposed,
Host against host with shadowy legends drew,
The sounding darts in iron tempests flew;
Victors and vanquish'd join promiscuous cries,
Triumphant shouts and dying groans arise;
With streaming blood the slippery fields are dyed,
And slaughter'd heroes swell the dreadful tide.
Long as the morning beams, increasing bright,
O'er heaven's clear azure spread the sacred light,
Commutual death the fate of war confounds,
Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds.
But when the sun the height of heaven ascends,
The sire of gods his golden scales suspends,
With equal hand: in these explored the fate
Of Greece and Troy, and poised the mighty weight:
Press'd with its load, the Grecian balance lies
Low sunk on earth, the Trojan strikes the skies.
Then Jove from Ida's top his horrors spreads;
The clouds burst dreadful o'er the Grecian heads;
Thick lightnings flash; the muttering thunder rolls;
Their strength he withers, and unmans their souls.
Before his wrath the trembling hosts retire;
The gods in terrors, and the skies on fire.
Nor great Idomeneus that sight could bear,
Nor each stern Ajax, thunderbolts of war:
Nor he, the king of war, the alarm sustain'd
Nestor alone, amidst the storm remain'd.
Unwilling he remain'd, for Paris' dart
Had pierced his courser in a mortal part;
Fix'd in the forehead, where the springing man
Curl'd o'er the brow, it stung him to the brain;
Mad with his anguish, he begins to rear,
Paw with his hoofs aloft, and lash the air.
Scarce had his falchion cut the reins, and freed
The encumber'd chariot from the dying steed,
When dreadful Hector, thundering through the war,
Pour'd to the tumult on his whirling car.
That day had stretch'd beneath his matchless hand
The hoary monarch of the Pylian band,
But Diomed beheld; from forth the crowd
He rush'd, and on Ulysses call'd aloud:

"Whither, oh whither does Ulysses run?
Oh, flight unworthy great Laertes' son!
Mix'd with the vulgar shall thy fate be found,
Pierced in the back, a vile, dishonest wound?
Oh turn and save from Hector's direful rage
The glory of the Greeks, the Pylian sage."
His fruitless words are lost unheard in air,
Ulysses seeks the ships, and shelters there.
But bold Tydides to the rescue goes,
A single warrior midst a host of foes;
Before the coursers with a sudden spring
He leap'd, and anxious thus bespoke the king:

"Great perils, father! wait the unequal fight;
These younger champions will oppress thy might.
Thy veins no more with ancient vigour glow,
Weak is thy servant, and thy coursers slow.
Then haste, ascend my seat, and from the car
Observe the steeds of Tros, renown'd in war.
Practised alike to turn, to stop, to chase,
To dare the fight, or urge the rapid race:
These late obey'd neas' guiding rein;
Leave thou thy chariot to our faithful train;
With these against yon Trojans will we go,
Nor shall great Hector want an equal foe;
Fierce as he is, even he may learn to fear
The thirsty fury of my flying spear."

Thus said the chief; and Nestor, skill'd in war,
Approves his counsel, and ascends the car:
The steeds he left, their trusty servants hold;
Eurymedon, and Sthenelus the bold:
The reverend charioteer directs the course,
And strains his aged arm to lash the horse.
Hector they face; unknowing how to fear,
Fierce he drove on; Tydides whirl'd his spear.
The spear with erring haste mistook its way,
But plunged in Eniopeus' bosom lay.
His opening hand in death forsakes the rein;
The steeds fly back: he falls, and spurns the plain.
Great Hector sorrows for his servant kill'd,
Yet unrevenged permits to press the field;
Till, to supply his place and rule the car,
Rose Archeptolemus, the fierce in war.
And now had death and horror cover'd all;
Like timorous flocks the Trojans in their wall
Inclosed had bled: but Jove with awful sound
Roll'd the big thunder o'er the vast profound:
Full in Tydides' face the lightning flew;
The ground before him flamed with sulphur blue;
The quivering steeds fell prostrate at the sight;
And Nestor's trembling hand confess'd his fright:
He dropp'd the reins: and, shook with sacred dread,
Thus, turning, warn'd the intrepid Diomed:

"O chief! too daring in thy friend's defence
Retire advised, and urge the chariot hence.
This day, averse, the sovereign of the skies
Assists great Hector, and our palm denies.
Some other sun may see the happier hour,
When Greece shall conquer by his heavenly power.
'Tis not in man his fix'd decree to move:
The great will glory to submit to Jove."

"O reverend prince! (Tydides thus replies)
Thy years are awful, and thy words are wise.
But ah, what grief! should haughty Hector boast
I fled inglorious to the guarded coast.
Before that dire disgrace shall blast my fame,
O'erwhelm me, earth; and hide a warrior's shame!"
To whom Gerenian Nestor thus replied:
"Gods! can thy courage fear the Phrygian's pride?
Hector may vaunt, but who shall heed the boast?
Not those who felt thy arm, the Dardan host,
Nor Troy, yet bleeding in her heroes lost;
Not even a Phrygian dame, who dreads the sword
That laid in dust her loved, lamented lord."
He said, and, hasty, o'er the gasping throng
Drives the swift steeds: the chariot smokes along;
The shouts of Trojans thicken in the wind;
The storm of hissing javelins pours behind.
Then with a voice that shakes the solid skies,
Pleased, Hector braves the warrior as he flies.
"Go, mighty hero! graced above the rest
In seats of council and the sumptuous feast:
Now hope no more those honours from thy train;
Go less than woman, in the form of man!
To scale our walls, to wrap our towers in flames,
To lead in exile the fair Phrygian dames,
Thy once proud hopes, presumptuous prince! are fled;
This arm shall reach thy heart, and stretch thee dead."

Now fears dissuade him, and now hopes invite.
To stop his coursers, and to stand the fight;
Thrice turn'd the chief, and thrice imperial Jove
On Ida's summits thunder'd from above.
Great Hector heard; he saw the flashing light,
(The sign of conquest,) and thus urged the fight:

"Hear, every Trojan, Lycian, Dardan band,
All famed in war, and dreadful hand to hand.
Be mindful of the wreaths your arms have won,
Your great forefathers' glories, and your own.
Heard ye the voice of Jove? Success and fame
Await on Troy, on Greece eternal shame.
In vain they skulk behind their boasted wall,
Weak bulwarks; destined by this arm to fall.
High o'er their slighted trench our steeds shall bound,
And pass victorious o'er the levell'd mound.
Soon as before yon hollow ships we stand,
Fight each with flames, and toss the blazing brand;
Till, their proud navy wrapt in smoke and fires,
All Greece, encompass'd, in one blaze expires."

Furious he said; then bending o'er the yoke,
Encouraged his proud steeds, while thus he spoke:

"Now, Xanthus, thon, Lampus, urge the chase,
And thou, Podargus! prove thy generous race;
Be fleet, be fearless, this important day,
And all your master's well-spent care repay.
For this, high-fed, in plenteous stalls ye stand,
Served with pure wheat, and by a princess' hand;
For this my spouse, of great Aetion's line,
So oft has steep'd the strengthening grain in wine.
Now swift pursue, now thunder uncontroll'd:
Give me to seize rich Nestor's shield of gold;
From Tydeus' shoulders strip the costly load,
Vulcanian arms, the labour of a god:
These if we gain, then victory, ye powers!
This night, this glorious night, the fleet is ours!"

That heard, deep anguish stung Saturnia's soul;
She shook her throne, that shook the starry pole:
And thus to Neptune: "Thou, whose force can make
The stedfast earth from her foundations shake,
Seest thou the Greeks by fates unjust oppress'd,
Nor swells thy heart in that immortal breast?
Yet gae, Helice, thy power obey,
And gifts unceasing on thine altars lay.
Would all the deities of Greece combine,
In vain the gloomy Thunderer might repine:
Sole should he sit, with scarce a god to friend,
And see his Trojans to the shades descend:
Such be the scene from his Idaean bower;
Ungrateful prospect to the sullen power!"

Neptune with wrath rejects the rash design:
"What rage, what madness, furious queen! is thine?
I war not with the highest. All above
Submit and tremble at the hand of Jove."

Now godlike Hector, to whose matchless might
Jove gave the glory of the destined fight,
Squadrons on squadrons drives, and fills the fields
With close-ranged chariots, and with thicken'd shields.
Where the deep trench in length extended lay,
Compacted troops stand wedged in firm array,
A dreadful front! they shake the brands, and threat
With long-destroying flames the hostile fleet.
The king of men, by Juno's self inspired,
Toil'd through the tents, and all his army fired.
Swift as he moved, he lifted in his hand
His purple robe, bright ensign of command.
High on the midmost bark the king appear'd:
There, from Ulysses' deck, his voice was heard:
To Ajax and Achilles reach'd the sound,
Whose distant ships the guarded navy bound.
"O Argives! shame of human race! (he cried:
The hollow vessels to his voice replied,)
Where now are all your glorious boasts of yore,
Your hasty triumphs on the Lemnian shore?
Each fearless hero dares a hundred foes,
While the feast lasts, and while the goblet flows;
But who to meet one martial man is found,
When the fight rages, and the flames surround?
O mighty Jove! O sire of the distress'd!
Was ever king like me, like me oppress'd?
With power immense, with justice arm'd in vain;
My glory ravish'd, and my people slain!
To thee my vows were breathed from every shore;
What altar smoked not with our victims' gore?
With fat of bulls I fed the constant flame,
And ask'd destruction to the Trojan name.
Now, gracious god! far humbler our demand;
Give these at least to 'scape from Hector's hand,
And save the relics of the Grecian land!"

Thus pray'd the king, and heaven's great father heard
His vows, in bitterness of soul preferr'd:
The wrath appeased, by happy signs declares,
And gives the people to their monarch's prayers.
His eagle, sacred bird of heaven! he sent,
A fawn his talons truss'd, (divine portent!)
High o'er the wondering hosts he soar'd above,
Who paid their vows to Panomphaean Jove;
Then let the prey before his altar fall;
The Greeks beheld, and transport seized on all:
Encouraged by the sign, the troops revive,
And fierce on Troy with doubled fury drive.
Tydides first, of all the Grecian force,
O'er the broad ditch impell'd his foaming horse,
Pierced the deep ranks, their strongest battle tore,
And dyed his javelin red with Trojan gore.
Young Agelaus (Phradmon was his sire)
With flying coursers shunn'd his dreadful ire;
Struck through the back, the Phrygian fell oppress'd;
The dart drove on, and issued at his breast:
Headlong he quits the car: his arms resound;
His ponderous buckler thunders on the ground.
Forth rush a tide of Greeks, the passage freed;
The Atridae first, the Ajaces next succeed:
Meriones, like Mars in arms renown'd,
And godlike Idomen, now passed the mound;
Evaemon's son next issues to the foe,
And last young Teucer with his bended bow.
Secure behind the Telamonian shield
The skilful archer wide survey'd the field,
With every shaft some hostile victim slew,
Then close beneath the sevenfold orb withdrew:
The conscious infant so, when fear alarms,
Retires for safety to the mother's arms.
Thus Ajax guards his brother in the field,
Moves as he moves, and turns the shining shield.
Who first by Teucer's mortal arrows bled?
Orsilochus; then fell Ormenus dead:
The godlike Lycophon next press'd the plain,
With Chromius, Daetor, Ophelestes slain:
Bold Hamopaon breathless sunk to ground;
The bloody pile great Melanippus crown'd.
Heaps fell on heaps, sad trophies of his art,
A Trojan ghost attending every dart.
Great Agamemnon views with joyful eye
The ranks grow thinner as his arrows fly:
"O youth forever dear! (the monarch cried)
Thus, always thus, thy early worth be tried;
Thy brave example shall retrieve our host,
Thy country's saviour, and thy father's boast!
Sprung from an alien's bed thy sire to grace,
The vigorous offspring of a stolen embrace:
Proud of his boy, he own'd the generous flame,
And the brave son repays his cares with fame.
Now hear a monarch's vow: If heaven's high powers
Give me to raze Troy's long-defended towers;
Whatever treasures Greece for me design,
The next rich honorary gift be thine:
Some golden tripod, or distinguished car,
With coursers dreadful in the ranks of war:
Or some fair captive, whom thy eyes approve,
Shall recompense the warrior's toils with love."

To this the chief: "With praise the rest inspire,
Nor urge a soul already fill'd with fire.
What strength I have, be now in battle tried,
Till every shaft in Phrygian blood be dyed.
Since rallying from our wall we forced the foe,
Still aim'd at Hector have I bent my bow:
Eight forky arrows from this hand have fled,
And eight bold heroes by their points lie dead:
But sure some god denies me to destroy
This fury of the field, this dog of Troy."

He said, and twang'd the string. The weapon flies
At Hector's breast, and sings along the skies:
He miss'd the mark; but pierced Gorgythio's heart,
And drench'd in royal blood the thirsty dart.
(Fair Castianira, nymph of form divine,
This offspring added to king Priam's line.)
As full-blown poppies, overcharged with rain,
Decline the head, and drooping kiss the plain;
So sinks the youth: his beauteous head, depress'd
Beneath his helmet, drops upon his breast.
Another shaft the raging archer drew,
That other shaft with erring fury flew,
(From Hector, Phoebus turn'd the flying wound,)
Yet fell not dry or guiltless to the ground:
Thy breast, brave Archeptolemus! it tore,
And dipp'd its feathers in no vulgar gore.
Headlong he falls: his sudden fall alarms
The steeds, that startle at his sounding arms.
Hector with grief his charioteer beheld
All pale and breathless on the sanguine field:
Then bids Cebriones direct the rein,
Quits his bright car, and issues on the plain.
Dreadful he shouts: from earth a stone he took,
And rush'd on Teucer with the lifted rock.
The youth already strain'd the forceful yew;
The shaft already to his shoulder drew;
The feather in his hand, just wing'd for flight,
Touch'd where the neck and hollow chest unite;
There, where the juncture knits the channel bone,
The furious chief discharged the craggy stone:
The bow-string burst beneath the ponderous blow,
And his numb'd hand dismiss'd his useless bow.
He fell: but Ajax his broad shield display'd,
And screen'd his brother with the mighty shade;
Till great Alaster, and Mecistheus, bore
The batter'd archer groaning to the shore.

Troy yet found grace before the Olympian sire,
He arm'd their hands, and fill'd their breasts with fire.
The Greeks repulsed, retreat behind their wall,
Or in the trench on heaps confusedly fall.
First of the foe, great Hector march'd along,
With terror clothed, and more than mortal strong.
As the bold hound, that gives the lion chase,
With beating bosom, and with eager pace,
Hangs on his haunch, or fastens on his heels,
Guards as he turns, and circles as he wheels;
Thus oft the Grecians turn'd, but still they flew;
Thus following, Hector still the hindmost slew.
When flying they had pass'd the trench profound,
And many a chief lay gasping on the ground;
Before the ships a desperate stand they made,
And fired the troops, and called the gods to aid.
Fierce on his rattling chariot Hector came:
His eyes like Gorgon shot a sanguine flame
That wither'd all their host: like Mars he stood:
Dire as the monster, dreadful as the god!
Their strong distress the wife of Jove survey'd;
Then pensive thus, to war's triumphant maid:

"O daughter of that god, whose arm can wield
The avenging bolt, and shake the sable shield!
Now, in this moment of her last despair,
Shall wretched Greece no more confess our care,
Condemn'd to suffer the full force of fate,
And drain the dregs of heaven's relentless hate?
Gods! shall one raging hand thus level all?
What numbers fell! what numbers yet shall fall!
What power divine shall Hector's wrath assuage?
Still swells the slaughter, and still grows the rage!"

So spake the imperial regent of the skies;
To whom the goddess with the azure eyes:

"Long since had Hector stain'd these fields with gore,
Stretch'd by some Argive on his native shore:
But he above, the sire of heaven, withstands,
Mocks our attempts, and slights our just demands;
The stubborn god, inflexible and hard,
Forgets my service and deserved reward:
Saved I, for this, his favourite son distress'd,
By stern Eurystheus with long labours press'd?
He begg'd, with tears he begg'd, in deep dismay;
I shot from heaven, and gave his arm the day.
Oh had my wisdom known this dire event,
When to grim Pluto's gloomy gates he went;
The triple dog had never felt his chain,
Nor Styx been cross'd, nor hell explored in vain.
Averse to me of all his heaven of gods,
At Thetis' suit the partial Thunderer nods;
To grace her gloomy, fierce, resenting son,
My hopes are frustrate, and my Greeks undone.
Some future day, perhaps, he may be moved
To call his blue-eyed maid his best beloved.
Haste, launch thy chariot, through yon ranks to ride;
Myself will arm, and thunder at thy side.
Then, goddess! say, shall Hector glory then?
(That terror of the Greeks, that man of men)
When Juno's self, and Pallas shall appear,
All dreadful in the crimson walks of war!
What mighty Trojan then, on yonder shore,
Expiring, pale, and terrible no more,
Shall feast the fowls, and glut the dogs with gore?"

She ceased, and Juno rein'd the steeds with care:
(Heaven's awful empress, Saturn's other heir:)
Pallas, meanwhile, her various veil unbound,
With flowers adorn'd, with art immortal crown'd;
The radiant robe her sacred fingers wove
Floats in rich waves, and spreads the court of Jove.
Her father's arms her mighty limbs invest,
His cuirass blazes on her ample breast.
The vigorous power the trembling car ascends:
Shook by her arm, the massy javelin bends:
Huge, ponderous, strong! that when her fury burns
Proud tyrants humbles, and whole hosts o'erturns.

Saturnia lends the lash; the coursers fly;
Smooth glides the chariot through the liquid sky.
Heaven's gates spontaneous open to the powers,
Heaven's golden gates, kept by the winged Hours.
Commission'd in alternate watch they stand,
The sun's bright portals and the skies command;
Close, or unfold, the eternal gates of day
Bar heaven with clouds, or roll those clouds away.
The sounding hinges ring, the clouds divide.
Prone down the steep of heaven their course they guide.
But Jove, incensed, from Ida's top survey'd,
And thus enjoin'd the many-colour'd maid.

"Thaumantia! mount the winds, and stop their car;
Against the highest who shall wage the war?
If furious yet they dare the vain debate,
Thus have I spoke, and what I speak is fate:
Their coursers crush'd beneath the wheels shall lie,
Their car in fragments, scatter'd o'er the sky:
My lightning these rebellious shall confound,
And hurl them flaming, headlong, to the ground,
Condemn'd for ten revolving years to weep
The wounds impress'd by burning thunder deep.
So shall Minerva learn to fear our ire,
Nor dare to combat hers and nature's sire.
For Juno, headstrong and imperious still,
She claims some title to transgress our will."

Swift as the wind, the various-colour'd maid
From Ida's top her golden wings display'd;
To great Olympus' shining gate she flies,
There meets the chariot rushing down the skies,
Restrains their progress from the bright abodes,
And speaks the mandate of the sire of gods.

"What frenzy goddesses! what rage can move
Celestial minds to tempt the wrath of Jove?
Desist, obedient to his high command:
This is his word; and know his word shall stand:
His lightning your rebellion shall confound,
And hurl ye headlong, flaming, to the ground;
Your horses crush'd beneath the wheels shall lie,
Your car in fragments scatter'd o'er the sky;
Yourselves condemn'd ten rolling years to weep
The wounds impress'd by burning thunder deep.
So shall Minerva learn to fear his ire,
Nor dare to combat hers and nature's sire.
For Juno, headstrong and imperious still,
She claims some title to transgress his will:
But thee, what desperate insolence has driven
To lift thy lance against the king of heaven?"

Then, mounting on the pinions of the wind,
She flew; and Juno thus her rage resign'd:

"O daughter of that god, whose arm can wield
The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield
No more let beings of superior birth
Contend with Jove for this low race of earth;
Triumphant now, now miserably slain,
They breathe or perish as the fates ordain:
But Jove's high counsels full effect shall find;
And, ever constant, ever rule mankind."

She spoke, and backward turn'd her steeds of light,
Adorn'd with manes of gold, and heavenly bright.
The Hours unloosed them, panting as they stood,
And heap'd their mangers with ambrosial food.
There tied, they rest in high celestial stalls;
The chariot propp'd against the crystal walls,
The pensive goddesses, abash'd, controll'd,
Mix with the gods, and fill their seats of gold.

And now the Thunderer meditates his flight
From Ida's summits to the Olympian height.
Swifter than thought, the wheels instinctive fly,
Flame through the vast of air, and reach the sky.
'Twas Neptune's charge his coursers to unbrace,
And fix the car on its immortal base;
There stood the chariot, beaming forth its rays,
Till with a snowy veil he screen'd the blaze.
He, whose all-conscious eyes the world behold,
The eternal Thunderer sat, enthroned in gold.
High heaven the footstool of his feet he makes,
And wide beneath him all Olympus shakes.
Trembling afar the offending powers appear'd,
Confused and silent, for his frown they fear'd.
He saw their soul, and thus his word imparts:
"Pallas and Juno! say, why heave your hearts?
Soon was your battle o'er: proud Troy retired
Before your face, and in your wrath expired.
But know, whoe'er almighty power withstand!
Unmatch'd our force, unconquer'd is our hand:
Who shall the sovereign of the skies control?
Not all the gods that crown the starry pole.
Your hearts shall tremble, if our arms we take,
And each immortal nerve with horror shake.
For thus I speak, and what I speak shall stand;
What power soe'er provokes our lifted hand,
On this our hill no more shall hold his place;
Cut off, and exiled from the ethereal race."

Juno and Pallas grieving hear the doom,
But feast their souls on Ilion's woes to come.
Though secret anger swell'd Minerva's breast,
The prudent goddess yet her wrath repress'd;
But Juno, impotent of rage, replies:
"What hast thou said, O tyrant of the skies!
Strength and omnipotence invest thy throne;
'Tis thine to punish; ours to grieve alone.
For Greece we grieve, abandon'd by her fate
To drink the dregs of thy unmeasured hate.
From fields forbidden we submiss refrain,
With arms unaiding see our Argives slain;
Yet grant our counsels still their breasts may move,
Lest all should perish in the rage of Jove."

The goddess thus; and thus the god replies,
Who swells the clouds, and blackens all the skies:

"The morning sun, awaked by loud alarms,
Shall see the almighty Thunderer in arms.
What heaps of Argives then shall load the plain,
Those radiant eyes shall view, and view in vain.
Nor shall great Hector cease the rage of fight,
The navy flaming, and thy Greeks in flight,
Even till the day when certain fates ordain
That stern Achilles (his Patroclus slain)
Shall rise in vengeance, and lay waste the plain.
For such is fate, nor canst thou turn its course
With all thy rage, with all thy rebel force.
Fly, if thy wilt, to earth's remotest bound,
Where on her utmost verge the seas resound;
Where cursed Iapetus and Saturn dwell,
Fast by the brink, within the streams of hell;
No sun e'er gilds the gloomy horrors there;
No cheerful gales refresh the lazy air:
There arm once more the bold Titanian band;
And arm in vain; for what I will, shall stand."

Now deep in ocean sunk the lamp of light,
And drew behind the cloudy veil of night:
The conquering Trojans mourn his beams decay'd;
The Greeks rejoicing bless the friendly shade.

The victors keep the field; and Hector calls
A martial council near the navy walls;
These to Scamander's bank apart he led,
Where thinly scatter'd lay the heaps of dead.
The assembled chiefs, descending on the ground,
Attend his order, and their prince surround.
A massy spear he bore of mighty strength,
Of full ten cubits was the lance's length;
The point was brass, refulgent to behold,
Fix'd to the wood with circling rings of gold:
The noble Hector on his lance reclined,
And, bending forward, thus reveal'd his mind:

"Ye valiant Trojans, with attention hear!
Ye Dardan bands, and generous aids, give ear!
This day, we hoped, would wrap in conquering flame
Greece with her ships, and crown our toils with fame.
But darkness now, to save the cowards, falls,
And guards them trembling in their wooden walls.
Obey the night, and use her peaceful hours
Our steeds to forage, and refresh our powers.
Straight from the town be sheep and oxen sought,
And strengthening bread and generous wine be brought
Wide o'er the field, high blazing to the sky,
Let numerous fires the absent sun supply,
The flaming piles with plenteous fuel raise,
Till the bright morn her purple beam displays;
Lest, in the silence and the shades of night,
Greece on her sable ships attempt her flight.
Not unmolested let the wretches gain
Their lofty decks, or safely cleave the main;
Some hostile wound let every dart bestow,
Some lasting token of the Phrygian foe,
Wounds, that long hence may ask their spouses' care.
And warn their children from a Trojan war.
Now through the circuit of our Ilion wall,
Let sacred heralds sound the solemn call;
To bid the sires with hoary honours crown'd,
And beardless youths, our battlements surround.
Firm be the guard, while distant lie our powers,
And let the matrons hang with lights the towers;
Lest, under covert of the midnight shade,
The insidious foe the naked town invade.
Suffice, to-night, these orders to obey;
A nobler charge shall rouse the dawning day.
The gods, I trust, shall give to Hector's hand
From these detested foes to free the land,
Who plough'd, with fates averse, the watery way:
For Trojan vultures a predestined prey.
Our common safety must be now the care;
But soon as morning paints the fields of air,
Sheathed in bright arms let every troop engage,
And the fired fleet behold the battle rage.
Then, then shall Hector and Tydides prove
Whose fates are heaviest in the scales of Jove.
To-morrow's light (O haste the glorious morn!)
Shall see his bloody spoils in triumph borne,
With this keen javelin shall his breast be gored,
And prostrate heroes bleed around their lord.
Certain as this, oh! might my days endure,
From age inglorious, and black death secure;
So might my life and glory know no bound,
Like Pallas worshipp'd, like the sun renown'd!
As the next dawn, the last they shall enjoy,
Shall crush the Greeks, and end the woes of Troy."

The leader spoke. From all his host around
Shouts of applause along the shores resound.
Each from the yoke the smoking steeds untied,
And fix'd their headstalls to his chariot-side.
Fat sheep and oxen from the town are led,
With generous wine, and all-sustaining bread,
Full hecatombs lay burning on the shore:
The winds to heaven the curling vapours bore.
Ungrateful offering to the immortal powers!
Whose wrath hung heavy o'er the Trojan towers:
Nor Priam nor his sons obtain'd their grace;
Proud Troy they hated, and her guilty race.

The troops exulting sat in order round,
And beaming fires illumined all the ground.
As when the moon, refulgent lamp of night,
O'er heaven's pure azure spreads her sacred light,
When not a breath disturbs the deep serene,
And not a cloud o'ercasts the solemn scene,
Around her throne the vivid planets roll,
And stars unnumber'd gild the glowing pole,
O'er the dark trees a yellower verdure shed,
And tip with silver every mountain's head:
Then shine the vales, the rocks in prospect rise,
A flood of glory bursts from all the skies:
The conscious swains, rejoicing in the sight,
Eye the blue vault, and bless the useful light.
So many flames before proud Ilion blaze,
And lighten glimmering Xanthus with their rays.
The long reflections of the distant fires
Gleam on the walls, and tremble on the spires.
A thousand piles the dusky horrors gild,
And shoot a shady lustre o'er the field.
Full fifty guards each flaming pile attend,
Whose umber'd arms, by fits, thick flashes send,
Loud neigh the coursers o'er their heaps of corn,
And ardent warriors wait the rising morn.

Thus joyful Troy maintain'd the watch of night;
While fear, pale comrade of inglorious flight,
And heaven-bred horror, on the Grecian part,
Sat on each face, and sadden'd every heart.
As from its cloudy dungeon issuing forth,
A double tempest of the west and north
Swells o'er the sea, from Thracia's frozen shore,
Heaps waves on waves, and bids the gean roar:
This way and that the boiling deeps are toss'd:
Such various passions urged the troubled host,
Great Agamemnon grieved above the rest;
Superior sorrows swell'd his royal breast;
Himself his orders to the heralds bears,
To bid to council all the Grecian peers,
But bid in whispers: these surround their chief,
In solemn sadness and majestic grief.
The king amidst the mournful circle rose:
Down his wan cheek a briny torrent flows.
So silent fountains, from a rock's tall head,
In sable streams soft-trickling waters shed.
With more than vulgar grief he stood oppress'd;
Words, mix'd with sighs, thus bursting from his breast:

"Ye sons of Greece! partake your leader's care;
Fellows in arms and princes of the war!
Of partial Jove too justly we complain,
And heavenly oracles believed in vain.
A safe return was promised to our toils,
With conquest honour'd and enrich'd with spoils:
Now shameful flight alone can save the host;
Our wealth, our people, and our glory lost.
So Jove decrees, almighty lord of all!
Jove, at whose nod whole empires rise or fall,
Who shakes the feeble props of human trust,
And towers and armies humbles to the dust.
Haste then, for ever quit these fatal fields,
Haste to the joys our native country yields;
Spread all your canvas, all your oars employ,
Nor hope the fall of heaven-defended Troy."

He said: deep silence held the Grecian band;
Silent, unmov'd in dire dismay they stand;
A pensive scene! till Tydeus' warlike son
Roll'd on the king his eyes, and thus begun:
"When kings advise us to renounce our fame,
First let him speak who first has suffer'd shame.
If I oppose thee, prince! thy wrath withhold,
The laws of council bid my tongue be bold.
Thou first, and thou alone, in fields of fight,
Durst brand my courage, and defame my might:
Nor from a friend the unkind reproach appear'd,
The Greeks stood witness, all our army heard.
The gods, O chief! from whom our honours spring,
The gods have made thee but by halves a king:
They gave thee sceptres, and a wide command;
They gave dominion o'er the seas and land;
The noblest power that might the world control
They gave thee not--a brave and virtuous soul.
Is this a general's voice, that would suggest
Fears like his own to every Grecian breast?
Confiding in our want of worth, he stands;
And if we fly, 'tis what our king commands.
Go thou, inglorious! from the embattled plain;
Ships thou hast store, and nearest to the main;
A noble care the Grecians shall employ,
To combat, conquer, and extirpate Troy.
Here Greece shall stay; or, if all Greece retire,
Myself shall stay, till Troy or I expire;
Myself, and Sthenelus, will fight for fame;
God bade us fight, and 'twas with God we came."

He ceased; the Greeks loud acclamations raise,
And voice to voice resounds Tydides' praise.
Wise Nestor then his reverend figure rear'd;
He spoke: the host in still attention heard:

"O truly great! in whom the gods have join'd
Such strength of body with such force of mind:
In conduct, as in courage, you excel,
Still first to act what you advise so well.
These wholesome counsels which thy wisdom moves,
Applauding Greece with common voice approves.
Kings thou canst blame; a bold but prudent youth:
And blame even kings with praise, because with truth.
And yet those years that since thy birth have run
Would hardly style thee Nestor's youngest son.
Then let me add what yet remains behind,
A thought unfinish'd in that generous mind;
Age bids me speak! nor shall the advice I bring
Distaste the people, or offend the king:

"Cursed is the man, and void of law and right,
Unworthy property, unworthy light,
Unfit for public rule, or private care,
That wretch, that monster, who delights in war;
Whose lust is murder, and whose horrid joy,
To tear his country, and his kind destroy!
This night, refresh and fortify thy train;
Between the trench and wall let guards remain:
Be that the duty of the young and bold;
But thou, O king, to council call the old;
Great is thy sway, and weighty are thy cares;
Thy high commands must spirit all our wars.
With Thracian wines recruit thy honour'd guests,
For happy counsels flow from sober feasts.
Wise, weighty counsels aid a state distress'd,
And such a monarch as can choose the best.
See what a blaze from hostile tents aspires,
How near our fleet approach the Trojan fires!
Who can, unmoved, behold the dreadful light?
What eye beholds them, and can close to-night?
This dreadful interval determines all;
To-morrow, Troy must flame, or Greece must fall."

Thus spoke the hoary sage: the rest obey;
Swift through the gates the guards direct their way.
His son was first to pass the lofty mound,
The generous Thrasymed, in arms renown'd:
Next him, Ascalaphus, Ialmen, stood,
The double offspring of the warrior-god:
Deipyrus, Aphareus, Merion join,
And Lycomed of Creon's noble line.
Seven were the leaders of the nightly bands,
And each bold chief a hundred spears commands.
The fires they light, to short repasts they fall,
Some line the trench, and others man the wall.

The king of men, on public counsels bent,
Convened the princes in his ample tent,
Each seized a portion of the kingly feast,
But stay'd his hand when thirst and hunger ceased.
Then Nestor spoke, for wisdom long approved,
And slowly rising, thus the council moved.

"Monarch of nations! whose superior sway
Assembled states, and lords of earth obey,
The laws and sceptres to thy hand are given,
And millions own the care of thee and Heaven.
O king! the counsels of my age attend;
With thee my cares begin, with thee must end.
Thee, prince! it fits alike to speak and hear,
Pronounce with judgment, with regard give ear,
To see no wholesome motion be withstood,
And ratify the best for public good.
Nor, though a meaner give advice, repine,
But follow it, and make the wisdom thine.
Hear then a thought, not now conceived in haste,
At once my present judgment and my past.
When from Pelides' tent you forced the maid,
I first opposed, and faithful, durst dissuade;
But bold of soul, when headlong fury fired,
You wronged the man, by men and gods admired:
Now seek some means his fatal wrath to end,
With prayers to move him, or with gifts to bend."

To whom the king. "With justice hast thou shown
A prince's faults, and I with reason own.
That happy man, whom Jove still honours most,
Is more than armies, and himself a host.
Bless'd in his love, this wondrous hero stands;
Heaven fights his war, and humbles all our bands.
Fain would my heart, which err'd through frantic rage,
The wrathful chief and angry gods assuage.
If gifts immense his mighty soul can bow,
Hear, all ye Greeks, and witness what I vow.
Ten weighty talents of the purest gold,
And twice ten vases of refulgent mould:
Seven sacred tripods, whose unsullied frame
Yet knows no office, nor has felt the flame;
Twelve steeds unmatch'd in fleetness and in force,
And still victorious in the dusty course;
(Rich were the man whose ample stores exceed
The prizes purchased by their winged speed;)
Seven lovely captives of the Lesbian line,
Skill'd in each art, unmatch'd in form divine,
The same I chose for more than vulgar charms,
When Lesbos sank beneath the hero's arms:
All these, to buy his friendship, shall be paid,
And join'd with these the long-contested maid;
With all her charms, Briseis I resign,
And solemn swear those charms were never mine;
Untouch'd she stay'd, uninjured she removes,
Pure from my arms, and guiltless of my loves,
These instant shall be his; and if the powers
Give to our arms proud Ilion's hostile towers,
Then shall he store (when Greece the spoil divides)
With gold and brass his loaded navy's sides:
Besides, full twenty nymphs of Trojan race
With copious love shall crown his warm embrace,
Such as himself will choose; who yield to none,
Or yield to Helen's heavenly charms alone.
Yet hear me further: when our wars are o'er,
If safe we land on Argos' fruitful shore,
There shall he live my son, our honours share,
And with Orestes' self divide my care.
Yet more--three daughters in my court are bred,
And each well worthy of a royal bed;
Laodice and Iphigenia fair,
And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair;
Her let him choose whom most his eyes approve,
I ask no presents, no reward for love:
Myself will give the dower; so vast a store
As never father gave a child before.
Seven ample cities shall confess his sway,
Him Enope, and Pherae him obey,
Cardamyle with ample turrets crown'd,
And sacred Pedasus for vines renown'd;
pea fair, the pastures Hira yields,
And rich Antheia with her flowery fields:
The whole extent to Pylos' sandy plain,
Along the verdant margin of the main
There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil;
Bold are the men, and generous is the soil;
There shall he reign, with power and justice crown'd,
And rule the tributary realms around.
All this I give, his vengeance to control,
And sure all this may move his mighty soul.
Pluto, the grisly god, who never spares,
Who feels no mercy, and who hears no prayers,
Lives dark and dreadful in deep hell's abodes,
And mortals hate him, as the worst of gods
Great though he be, it fits him to obey,
Since more than his my years, and more my sway."

The monarch thus. The reverend Nestor then:
"Great Agamemnon! glorious king of men!
Such are thy offers as a prince may take,
And such as fits a generous king to make.
Let chosen delegates this hour be sent
(Myself will name them) to Pelides' tent.
Let Phoenix lead, revered for hoary age,
Great Ajax next, and Ithacus the sage.
Yet more to sanctify the word you send,
Let Hodius and Eurybates attend.
Now pray to Jove to grant what Greece demands;
Pray in deep silence, and with purest hands."

He said; and all approved. The heralds bring
The cleansing water from the living spring.
The youth with wine the sacred goblets crown'd,
And large libations drench'd the sands around.
The rite perform'd, the chiefs their thirst allay,
Then from the royal tent they take their way;
Wise Nestor turns on each his careful eye,
Forbids to offend, instructs them to apply;
Much he advised them all, Ulysses most,
To deprecate the chief, and save the host.
Through the still night they march, and hear the roar
Of murmuring billows on the sounding shore.
To Neptune, ruler of the seas profound,
Whose liquid arms the mighty globe surround,
They pour forth vows, their embassy to bless,
And calm the rage of stern acides.
And now, arrived, where on the sandy bay
The Myrmidonian tents and vessels lay;
Amused at ease, the godlike man they found,
Pleased with the solemn harp's harmonious sound.
(The well wrought harp from conquered Thebae came;
Of polish'd silver was its costly frame.)
With this he soothes his angry soul, and sings
The immortal deeds of heroes and of kings.
Patroclus only of the royal train,
Placed in his tent, attends the lofty strain:
Full opposite he sat, and listen'd long,
In silence waiting till he ceased the song.
Unseen the Grecian embassy proceeds
To his high tent; the great Ulysses leads.
Achilles starting, as the chiefs he spied,
Leap'd from his seat, and laid the harp aside.
With like surprise arose Menoetius' son:
Pelides grasp'd their hands, and thus begun:

"Princes, all hail! whatever brought you here.
Or strong necessity, or urgent fear;
Welcome, though Greeks! for not as foes ye came;
To me more dear than all that bear the name."

With that, the chiefs beneath his roof he led,
And placed in seats with purple carpets spread.
Then thus--"Patroclus, crown a larger bowl,
Mix purer wine, and open every soul.
Of all the warriors yonder host can send,
Thy friend most honours these, and these thy friend."

He said: Patroclus o'er the blazing fire
Heaps in a brazen vase three chines entire:
The brazen vase Automedon sustains,
Which flesh of porker, sheep, and goat contains.
Achilles at the genial feast presides,
The parts transfixes, and with skill divides.
Meanwhile Patroclus sweats, the fire to raise;
The tent is brighten'd with the rising blaze:
Then, when the languid flames at length subside,
He strows a bed of glowing embers wide,
Above the coals the smoking fragments turns
And sprinkles sacred salt from lifted urns;
With bread the glittering canisters they load,
Which round the board Menoetius' son bestow'd;
Himself, opposed to Ulysses full in sight,
Each portion parts, and orders every rite.
The first fat offering to the immortals due,
Amidst the greedy flames Patroclus threw;
Then each, indulging in the social feast,
His thirst and hunger soberly repress'd.
That done, to Phoenix Ajax gave the sign:
Not unperceived; Ulysses crown'd with wine
The foaming bowl, and instant thus began,
His speech addressing to the godlike man.

"Health to Achilles! happy are thy guests!
Not those more honour'd whom Atrides feasts:
Though generous plenty crown thy loaded boards,
That, Agamemnon's regal tent affords;
But greater cares sit heavy on our souls,
Nor eased by banquets or by flowing bowls.
What scenes of slaughter in yon fields appear!
The dead we mourn, and for the living fear;
Greece on the brink of fate all doubtful stands,
And owns no help but from thy saving hands:
Troy and her aids for ready vengeance call;
Their threatening tents already shade our wall:
Hear how with shouts their conquest they proclaim,
And point at every ship their vengeful flame!
For them the father of the gods declares,
Theirs are his omens, and his thunder theirs.
See, full of Jove, avenging Hector rise!
See! heaven and earth the raging chief defies;
What fury in his breast, what lightning in his eyes!
He waits but for the morn, to sink in flame
The ships, the Greeks, and all the Grecian name.
Heavens! how my country's woes distract my mind,
Lest Fate accomplish all his rage design'd!
And must we, gods! our heads inglorious lay
In Trojan dust, and this the fatal day?
Return, Achilles: oh return, though late,
To save thy Greeks, and stop the course of Fate;
If in that heart or grief or courage lies,
Rise to redeem; ah, yet to conquer, rise!
The day may come, when, all our warriors slain,
That heart shall melt, that courage rise in vain:
Regard in time, O prince divinely brave!
Those wholesome counsels which thy father gave.
When Peleus in his aged arms embraced
His parting son, these accents were his last:

"'My child! with strength, with glory, and success,
Thy arms may Juno and Minerva bless!
Trust that to Heaven: but thou, thy cares engage
To calm thy passions, and subdue thy rage:
From gentler manners let thy glory grow,
And shun contention, the sure source of woe;
That young and old may in thy praise combine,
The virtues of humanity be thine--'
This now-despised advice thy father gave;
Ah! check thy anger; and be truly brave.
If thou wilt yield to great Atrides' prayers,
Gifts worthy thee his royal hand prepares;
If not--but hear me, while I number o'er
The proffer'd presents, an exhaustless store.
Ten weighty talents of the purest gold,
And twice ten vases of refulgent mould;
Seven sacred tripods, whose unsullied frame
Yet knows no office, nor has felt the flame;
Twelve steeds unmatched in fleetness and in force,
And still victorious in the dusty course;
(Rich were the man, whose ample stores exceed
The prizes purchased by their winged speed;)
Seven lovely captives of the Lesbian line,
Skill'd in each art, unmatch'd in form divine,
The same he chose for more than vulgar charms,
When Lesbos sank beneath thy conquering arms.
All these, to buy thy friendship shall be paid,
And, join'd with these, the long-contested maid;
With all her charms, Briseis he'll resign,
And solemn swear those charms were only thine;
Untouch'd she stay'd, uninjured she removes,
Pure from his arms, and guiltless of his loves.
These instant shall be thine; and if the powers
Give to our arms proud Ilion's hostile towers,
Then shalt thou store (when Greece the spoil divides)
With gold and brass thy loaded navy's sides.
Besides, full twenty nymphs of Trojan race
With copious love shall crown thy warm embrace;
Such as thyself shall chose; who yield to none,
Or yield to Helen's heavenly charms alone.
Yet hear me further: when our wars are o'er,
If safe we land on Argos' fruitful shore,
There shalt thou live his son, his honour share,
And with Orestes' self divide his care.
Yet more--three daughters in his court are bred,
And each well worthy of a royal bed:
Laodice and Iphigenia fair,
And bright Chrysothemis with golden hair:
Her shalt thou wed whom most thy eyes approve;
He asks no presents, no reward for love:
Himself will give the dower; so vast a store
As never father gave a child before.
Seven ample cities shall confess thy sway,
The Enope and Pherae thee obey,
Cardamyle with ample turrets crown'd,
And sacred Pedasus, for vines renown'd:
pea fair, the pastures Hira yields,
And rich Antheia with her flowery fields;
The whole extent to Pylos' sandy plain,
Along the verdant margin of the main.
There heifers graze, and labouring oxen toil;
Bold are the men, and generous is the soil.
There shalt thou reign, with power and justice crown'd,
And rule the tributary realms around.
Such are the proffers which this day we bring,
Such the repentance of a suppliant king.
But if all this, relentless, thou disdain,
If honour and if interest plead in vain,
Yet some redress to suppliant Greece afford,
And be, amongst her guardian gods, adored.
If no regard thy suffering country claim,
Hear thy own glory, and the voice of fame:
For now that chief, whose unresisted ire
Made nations tremble, and whole hosts retire,
Proud Hector, now, the unequal fight demands,
And only triumphs to deserve thy hands."

Then thus the goddess-born: "Ulysses, hear
A faithful speech, that knows nor art nor fear;
What in my secret soul is understood,
My tongue shall utter, and my deeds make good.
Let Greece then know, my purpose I retain:
Nor with new treaties vex my peace in vain.
Who dares think one thing, and another tell,
My heart detests him as the gates of hell.

"Then thus in short my fix'd resolves attend,
Which nor Atrides nor his Greeks can bend;
Long toils, long perils in their cause I bore,
But now the unfruitful glories charm no more.
Fight or not fight, a like reward we claim,
The wretch and hero find their prize the same.
Alike regretted in the dust he lies,
Who yields ignobly, or who bravely dies.
Of all my dangers, all my glorious pains,
A life of labours, lo! what fruit remains?
As the bold bird her helpless young attends,
From danger guards them, and from want defends;
In search of prey she wings the spacious air,
And with the untasted food supplies her care:
For thankless Greece such hardships have I braved,
Her wives, her infants, by my labours saved;
Long sleepless nights in heavy arms I stood,
And sweat laborious days in dust and blood.
I sack'd twelve ample cities on the main,
And twelve lay smoking on the Trojan plain:
Then at Atrides' haughty feet were laid
The wealth I gathered, and the spoils I made.
Your mighty monarch these in peace possess'd;
Some few my soldiers had, himself the rest.
Some present, too, to every prince was paid;
And every prince enjoys the gift he made:
I only must refund, of all his train;
See what pre-eminence our merits gain!
My spoil alone his greedy soul delights:
My spouse alone must bless his lustful nights:
The woman, let him (as he may) enjoy;
But what's the quarrel, then, of Greece to Troy?
What to these shores the assembled nations draws,
What calls for vengeance but a woman's cause?
Are fair endowments and a beauteous face
Beloved by none but those of Atreus' race?
The wife whom choice and passion doth approve,
Sure every wise and worthy man will love.
Nor did my fair one less distinction claim;
Slave as she was, my soul adored the dame.
Wrong'd in my love, all proffers I disdain;
Deceived for once, I trust not kings again.
Ye have my answer--what remains to do,
Your king, Ulysses, may consult with you.
What needs he the defence this arm can make?
Has he not walls no human force can shake?
Has he not fenced his guarded navy round
With piles, with ramparts, and a trench profound?
And will not these (the wonders he has done)
Repel the rage of Priam's single son?
There was a time ('twas when for Greece I fought)
When Hector's prowess no such wonders wrought;
He kept the verge of Troy, nor dared to wait
Achilles' fury at the Scaean gate;
He tried it once, and scarce was saved by fate.
But now those ancient enmities are o'er;
To-morrow we the favouring gods implore;
Then shall you see our parting vessels crown'd,
And hear with oars the Hellespont resound.
The third day hence shall Pthia greet our sails,
If mighty Neptune send propitious gales;
Pthia to her Achilles shall restore
The wealth he left for this detested shore:
Thither the spoils of this long war shall pass,
The ruddy gold, the steel, and shining brass:
My beauteous captives thither I'll convey,
And all that rests of my unravish'd prey.
One only valued gift your tyrant gave,
And that resumed--the fair Lyrnessian slave.
Then tell him: loud, that all the Greeks may hear,
And learn to scorn the wretch they basely fear;
(For arm'd in impudence, mankind he braves,
And meditates new cheats on all his slaves;
Though shameless as he is, to face these eyes
Is what he dares not: if he dares he dies;)
Tell him, all terms, all commerce I decline,
Nor share his council, nor his battle join;
For once deceiv'd, was his; but twice were mine,
No--let the stupid prince, whom Jove deprives
Of sense and justice, run where frenzy drives;
His gifts are hateful: kings of such a kind
Stand but as slaves before a noble mind,
Not though he proffer'd all himself possess'd,
And all his rapine could from others wrest:
Not all the golden tides of wealth that crown
The many-peopled Orchomenian town;
Not all proud Thebes' unrivall'd walls contain,
The world's great empress on the Egyptian plain
(That spreads her conquests o'er a thousand states,
And pours her heroes through a hundred gates,
Two hundred horsemen and two hundred cars
From each wide portal issuing to the wars);
Though bribes were heap'd on bribes, in number more
Than dust in fields, or sands along the shore;
Should all these offers for my friendship call,
'Tis he that offers, and I scorn them all.
Atrides' daughter never shall be led
(An ill-match'd consort) to Achilles' bed;
Like golden Venus though she charm'd the heart,
And vied with Pallas in the works of art;
Some greater Greek let those high nuptials grace,
I hate alliance with a tyrant's race.
If heaven restore me to my realms with life,
The reverend Peleus shall elect my wife;
Thessalian nymphs there are of form divine,
And kings that sue to mix their blood with mine.
Bless'd in kind love, my years shall glide away,
Content with just hereditary sway;
There, deaf for ever to the martial strife,
Enjoy the dear prerogative of life.
Life is not to be bought with heaps of gold.
Not all Apollo's Pythian treasures hold,
Or Troy once held, in peace and pride of sway,
Can bribe the poor possession of a day!
Lost herds and treasures we by arms regain,
And steeds unrivall'd on the dusty plain:
But from our lips the vital spirit fled,
Returns no more to wake the silent dead.
My fates long since by Thetis were disclosed,
And each alternate, life or fame, proposed;
Here, if I stay, before the Trojan town,
Short is my date, but deathless my renown:
If I return, I quit immortal praise
For years on years, and long-extended days.
Convinced, though late, I find my fond mistake,
And warn the Greeks the wiser choice to make;
To quit these shores, their native seats enjoy,
Nor hope the fall of heaven-defended Troy.
Jove's arm display'd asserts her from the skies!
Her hearts are strengthen'd, and her glories rise.
Go then to Greece, report our fix'd design;
Bid all your counsels, all your armies join,
Let all your forces, all your arts conspire,
To save the ships, the troops, the chiefs, from fire.
One stratagem has fail'd, and others will:
Ye find, Achilles is unconquer'd still.
Go then--digest my message as ye may--
But here this night let reverend Phoenix stay:
His tedious toils and hoary hairs demand
A peaceful death in Pthia's friendly land.
But whether he remain or sail with me,
His age be sacred, and his will be free."

The son of Peleus ceased: the chiefs around
In silence wrapt, in consternation drown'd,
Attend the stern reply. Then Phoenix rose;
(Down his white beard a stream of sorrow flows;)
And while the fate of suffering Greece he mourn'd,
With accent weak these tender words return'd.

"Divine Achilles! wilt thou then retire,
And leave our hosts in blood, our fleets on fire?
If wrath so dreadful fill thy ruthless mind,
How shall thy friend, thy Phoenix, stay behind?
The royal Peleus, when from Pthia's coast
He sent thee early to the Achaian host;
Thy youth as then in sage debates unskill'd,
And new to perils of the direful field:
He bade me teach thee all the ways of war,
To shine in councils, and in camps to dare.
Never, ah, never let me leave thy side!
No time shall part us, and no fate divide,
Not though the god, that breathed my life, restore
The bloom I boasted, and the port I bore,
When Greece of old beheld my youthful flames
(Delightful Greece, the land of lovely dames),
My father faithless to my mother's arms,
Old as he was, adored a stranger's charms.
I tried what youth could do (at her desire)
To win the damsel, and prevent my sire.
My sire with curses loads my hated head,
And cries, 'Ye furies! barren be his bed.'
Infernal Jove, the vengeful fiends below,
And ruthless Proserpine, confirm'd his vow.
Despair and grief distract my labouring mind!
Gods! what a crime my impious heart design'd!
I thought (but some kind god that thought suppress'd)
To plunge the poniard in my father's breast;
Then meditate my flight: my friends in vain
With prayers entreat me, and with force detain.
On fat of rams, black bulls, and brawny swine,
They daily feast, with draughts of fragrant wine;
Strong guards they placed, and watch'd nine nights entire;
The roofs and porches flamed with constant fire.
The tenth, I forced the gates, unseen of all:
And, favour'd by the night, o'erleap'd the wall,
My travels thence through spacious Greece extend;
In Phthia's court at last my labours end.
Your sire received me, as his son caress'd,
With gifts enrich'd, and with possessions bless'd.
The strong Dolopians thenceforth own'd my reign,
And all the coast that runs along the main.
By love to thee his bounties I repaid,
And early wisdom to thy soul convey'd:
Great as thou art, my lessons made thee brave:
A child I took thee, but a hero gave.
Thy infant breast a like affection show'd;
Still in my arms (an ever-pleasing load)
Or at my knee, by Phoenix wouldst thou stand;
No food was grateful but from Phoenix' hand.
I pass my watchings o'er thy helpless years,
The tender labours, the compliant cares,
The gods (I thought) reversed their hard decree,
And Phoenix felt a father's joys in thee:
Thy growing virtues justified my cares,
And promised comfort to my silver hairs.
Now be thy rage, thy fatal rage, resign'd;
A cruel heart ill suits a manly mind:
The gods (the only great, and only wise)
Are moved by offerings, vows, and sacrifice;
Offending man their high compassion wins,
And daily prayers atone for daily sins.
Prayers are Jove's daughters, of celestial race,
Lame are their feet, and wrinkled is their face;
With humble mien, and with dejected eyes,
Constant they follow, where injustice flies.
Injustice swift, erect, and unconfined,
Sweeps the wide earth, and tramples o'er mankind,
While Prayers, to heal her wrongs, move slow behind.
Who hears these daughters of almighty Jove,
For him they mediate to the throne above
When man rejects the humble suit they make,
The sire revenges for the daughters' sake;
From Jove commission'd, fierce injustice then
Descends to punish unrelenting men.
O let not headlong passion bear the sway
These reconciling goddesses obey
Due honours to the seed of Jove belong,
Due honours calm the fierce, and bend the strong.
Were these not paid thee by the terms we bring,
Were rage still harbour'd in the haughty king;
Nor Greece nor all her fortunes should engage
Thy friend to plead against so just a rage.
But since what honour asks the general sends,
And sends by those whom most thy heart commends;
The best and noblest of the Grecian train;
Permit not these to sue, and sue in vain!
Let me (my son) an ancient fact unfold,
A great example drawn from times of old;
Hear what our fathers were, and what their praise,
Who conquer'd their revenge in former days.

"Where Calydon on rocky mountains stands
Once fought the tolian and Curetian bands;
To guard it those; to conquer, these advance;
And mutual deaths were dealt with mutual chance.
The silver Cynthia bade contention rise,
In vengeance of neglected sacrifice;
On Oeneus fields she sent a monstrous boar,
That levell'd harvests, and whole forests tore:
This beast (when many a chief his tusks had slain)
Great Meleager stretch'd along the plain,
Then, for his spoils, a new debate arose,
The neighbour nations thence commencing foes.
Strong as they were, the bold Curetes fail'd,
While Meleager's thundering arm prevail'd:
Till rage at length inflamed his lofty breast
(For rage invades the wisest and the best).

"Cursed by Althaea, to his wrath he yields,
And in his wife's embrace forgets the fields.
(She from Marpessa sprung, divinely fair,
And matchless Idas, more than man in war:
The god of day adored the mother's charms;
Against the god the father bent his arms:
The afflicted pair, their sorrows to proclaim,
From Cleopatra changed their daughter's name,
And call'd Alcyone; a name to show
The father's grief, the mourning mother's woe.)
To her the chief retired from stern debate,
But found no peace from fierce Althaea's hate:
Althaea's hate the unhappy warrior drew,
Whose luckless hand his royal uncle slew;
She beat the ground, and call'd the powers beneath
On her own son to wreak her brother's death;
Hell heard her curses from the realms profound,
And the red fiends that walk the nightly round.
In vain tolia her deliverer waits,
War shakes her walls, and thunders at her gates.
She sent ambassadors, a chosen band,
Priests of the gods, and elders of the land;
Besought the chief to save the sinking state:
Their prayers were urgent, and their proffers great:
(Full fifty acres of the richest ground,
Half pasture green, and half with vineyards crown'd:)
His suppliant father, aged Oeneus, came;
His sisters follow'd; even the vengeful dame,
Althaea, sues; his friends before him fall:
He stands relentless, and rejects them all.
Meanwhile the victor's shouts ascend the skies;
The walls are scaled; the rolling flames arise;
At length his wife (a form divine) appears,
With piercing cries, and supplicating tears;
She paints the horrors of a conquer'd town,
The heroes slain, the palaces o'erthrown,
The matrons ravish'd, the whole race enslaved:
The warrior heard, he vanquish'd, and he saved.
The tolians, long disdain'd, now took their turn,
And left the chief their broken faith to mourn.
Learn hence, betimes to curb pernicious ire,
Nor stay till yonder fleets ascend in fire;
Accept the presents; draw thy conquering sword;
And be amongst our guardian gods adored."

Thus he: the stern Achilles thus replied:
"My second father, and my reverend guide:
Thy friend, believe me, no such gifts demands,
And asks no honours from a mortal's hands;
Jove honours me, and favours my designs;
His pleasure guides me, and his will confines;
And here I stay (if such his high behest)
While life's warm spirit beats within my breast.
Yet hear one word, and lodge it in thy heart:
No more molest me on Atrides' part:
Is it for him these tears are taught to flow,
For him these sorrows? for my mortal foe?
A generous friendship no cold medium knows,
Burns with one love, with one resentment glows;
One should our interests and our passions be;
My friend must hate the man that injures me.
Do this, my Phoenix, 'tis a generous part;
And share my realms, my honours, and my heart.
Let these return: our voyage, or our stay,
Rest undetermined till the dawning day."

He ceased; then order'd for the sage's bed
A warmer couch with numerous carpets spread.
With that, stern Ajax his long silence broke,
And thus, impatient, to Ulysses spoke:

"Hence let us go--why waste we time in vain?
See what effect our low submissions gain!
Liked or not liked, his words we must relate,
The Greeks expect them, and our heroes wait.
Proud as he is, that iron heart retains
Its stubborn purpose, and his friends disdains.
Stern and unpitying! if a brother bleed,
On just atonement, we remit the deed;
A sire the slaughter of his son forgives;
The price of blood discharged, the murderer lives:
The haughtiest hearts at length their rage resign,
And gifts can conquer every soul but thine.
The gods that unrelenting breast have steel'd,
And cursed thee with a mind that cannot yield.
One woman-slave was ravish'd from thy arms:
Lo, seven are offer'd, and of equal charms.
Then hear, Achilles! be of better mind;
Revere thy roof, and to thy guests be kind;
And know the men of all the Grecian host,
Who honour worth, and prize thy valour most."

"O soul of battles, and thy people's guide!
(To Ajax thus the first of Greeks replied)
Well hast thou spoke; but at the tyrant's name
My rage rekindles, and my soul's on flame:
'Tis just resentment, and becomes the brave:
Disgraced, dishonour'd, like the vilest slave!
Return, then, heroes! and our answer bear,
The glorious combat is no more my care;
Not till, amidst yon sinking navy slain,
The blood of Greeks shall dye the sable main;
Not till the flames, by Hector's fury thrown,
Consume your vessels, and approach my own;
Just there, the impetuous homicide shall stand,
There cease his battle, and there feel our hand."

This said, each prince a double goblet crown'd,
And cast a large libation on the ground;
Then to their vessels, through the gloomy shades,
The chiefs return; divine Ulysses leads.
Meantime Achilles' slaves prepared a bed,
With fleeces, carpets, and soft linen spread:
There, till the sacred morn restored the day,
In slumber sweet the reverend Phoenix lay.
But in his inner tent, an ampler space,
Achilles slept; and in his warm embrace
Fair Diomede of the Lesbian race.
Last, for Patroclus was the couch prepared,
Whose nightly joys the beauteous Iphis shared;
Achilles to his friend consign'd her charms
When Scyros fell before his conquering arms.

And now the elected chiefs whom Greece had sent,
Pass'd through the hosts, and reach'd the royal tent.
Then rising all, with goblets in their hands,
The peers and leaders of the Achaian bands
Hail'd their return: Atrides first begun:

"Say what success? divine Laertes' son!
Achilles' high resolves declare to all:
"Returns the chief, or must our navy fall?"

"Great king of nations! (Ithacus replied)
Fix'd is his wrath, unconquer'd is his pride;
He slights thy friendship, thy proposals scorns,
And, thus implored, with fiercer fury burns.
To save our army, and our fleets to free,
Is not his care; but left to Greece and thee.
Your eyes shall view, when morning paints the sky,
Beneath his oars the whitening billows fly;
Us too he bids our oars and sails employ,
Nor hope the fall of heaven-protected Troy;
For Jove o'ershades her with his arm divine,
Inspires her war, and bids her glory shine.
Such was his word: what further he declared,
These sacred heralds and great Ajax heard.
But Phoenix in his tent the chief retains,
Safe to transport him to his native plains
When morning dawns; if other he decree,
His age is sacred, and his choice is free."

Ulysses ceased: the great Achaian host,
With sorrow seized, in consternation lost,
Attend the stern reply. Tydides broke
The general silence, and undaunted spoke.
"Why should we gifts to proud Achilles send,
Or strive with prayers his haughty soul to bend?
His country's woes he glories to deride,
And prayers will burst that swelling heart with pride.
Be the fierce impulse of his rage obey'd,
Our battles let him or desert or aid;
Then let him arm when Jove or he think fit:
That, to his madness, or to Heaven commit:
What for ourselves we can, is always ours;
This night, let due repast refresh our powers;
(For strength consists in spirits and in blood,
And those are owed to generous wine and food;)
But when the rosy messenger of day
Strikes the blue mountains with her golden ray,
Ranged at the ships, let all our squadrons shine
In flaming arms, a long-extended line:
In the dread front let great Atrides stand,
The first in danger, as in high command."

Shouts of acclaim the listening heroes raise,
Then each to Heaven the due libations pays;
Till sleep, descending o'er the tents, bestows
The grateful blessings of desired repose."

All night the chiefs before their vessels lay,
And lost in sleep the labours of the day:
All but the king: with various thoughts oppress'd,
His country's cares lay rolling in his breast.
As when by lightnings Jove's ethereal power
Foretels the rattling hail, or weighty shower,
Or sends soft snows to whiten all the shore,
Or bids the brazen throat of war to roar;
By fits one flash succeeds as one expires,
And heaven flames thick with momentary fires:
So bursting frequent from Atrides' breast,
Sighs following sighs his inward fears confess'd.
Now o'er the fields, dejected, he surveys
From thousand Trojan fires the mounting blaze;
Hears in the passing wind their music blow,
And marks distinct the voices of the foe.
Now looking backwards to the fleet and coast,
Anxious he sorrows for the endangered host.
He rends his hair, in sacrifice to Jove,
And sues to him that ever lives above:
Inly he groans; while glory and despair
Divide his heart, and wage a double war.

A thousand cares his labouring breast revolves;
To seek sage Nestor now the chief resolves,
With him, in wholesome counsels, to debate
What yet remains to save the afflicted state.
He rose, and first he cast his mantle round,
Next on his feet the shining sandals bound;
A lion's yellow spoils his back conceal'd;
His warlike hand a pointed javelin held.
Meanwhile his brother, press'd with equal woes,
Alike denied the gifts of soft repose,
Laments for Greece, that in his cause before
So much had suffer'd and must suffer more.
A leopard's spotted hide his shoulders spread:
A brazen helmet glitter'd on his head:
Thus (with a javelin in his hand) he went
To wake Atrides in the royal tent.
Already waked, Atrides he descried,
His armour buckling at his vessel's side.
Joyful they met; the Spartan thus begun:
"Why puts my brother his bright armour on?
Sends he some spy, amidst these silent hours,
To try yon camp, and watch the Trojan powers?
But say, what hero shall sustain that task?
Such bold exploits uncommon courage ask;
Guideless, alone, through night's dark shade to go,
And midst a hostile camp explore the foe."

To whom the king: "In such distress we stand,
No vulgar counsel our affairs demand;
Greece to preserve, is now no easy part,
But asks high wisdom, deep design, and art.
For Jove, averse, our humble prayer denies,
And bows his head to Hector's sacrifice.
What eye has witness'd, or what ear believed,
In one great day, by one great arm achieved,
Such wondrous deeds as Hector's hand has done,
And we beheld, the last revolving sun
What honours the beloved of Jove adorn!
Sprung from no god, and of no goddess born;
Yet such his acts, as Greeks unborn shall tell,
And curse the battle where their fathers fell.

"Now speed thy hasty course along the fleet,
There call great Ajax, and the prince of Crete;
Ourself to hoary Nestor will repair;
To keep the guards on duty be his care,
(For Nestor's influence best that quarter guides,
Whose son with Merion, o'er the watch presides.")
To whom the Spartan: "These thy orders borne,
Say, shall I stay, or with despatch return?"
"There shall thou stay, (the king of men replied,)
Else may we miss to meet, without a guide,
The paths so many, and the camp so wide.
Still, with your voice the slothful soldiers raise,
Urge by their fathers' fame their future praise.
Forget we now our state and lofty birth;
Not titles here, but works, must prove our worth.
To labour is the lot of man below;
And when Jove gave us life, he gave us woe."

This said, each parted to his several cares:
The king to Nestor's sable ship repairs;
The sage protector of the Greeks he found
Stretch'd in his bed with all his arms around
The various-colour'd scarf, the shield he rears,
The shining helmet, and the pointed spears;
The dreadful weapons of the warrior's rage,
That, old in arms, disdain'd the peace of age.
Then, leaning on his hand his watchful head,
The hoary monarch raised his eyes and said:

"What art thou, speak, that on designs unknown,
While others sleep, thus range the camp alone;
Seek'st thou some friend or nightly sentinel?
Stand off, approach not, but thy purpose tell."

"O son of Neleus, (thus the king rejoin'd,)
Pride of the Greeks, and glory of thy kind!
Lo, here the wretched Agamemnon stands,
The unhappy general of the Grecian bands,
Whom Jove decrees with daily cares to bend,
And woes, that only with his life shall end!
Scarce can my knees these trembling limbs sustain,
And scarce my heart support its load of pain.
No taste of sleep these heavy eyes have known,
Confused, and sad, I wander thus alone,
With fears distracted, with no fix'd design;
And all my people's miseries are mine.
If aught of use thy waking thoughts suggest,
(Since cares, like mine, deprive thy soul of rest,)
Impart thy counsel, and assist thy friend;
Now let us jointly to the trench descend,
At every gate the fainting guard excite,
Tired with the toils of day and watch of night;
Else may the sudden foe our works invade,
So near, and favour'd by the gloomy shade."

To him thus Nestor: "Trust the powers above,
Nor think proud Hector's hopes confirm'd by Jove:
How ill agree the views of vain mankind,
And the wise counsels of the eternal mind!
Audacious Hector, if the gods ordain
That great Achilles rise and rage again,
What toils attend thee, and what woes remain!
Lo, faithful Nestor thy command obeys;
The care is next our other chiefs to raise:
Ulysses, Diomed, we chiefly need;
Meges for strength, Oileus famed for speed.
Some other be despatch'd of nimbler feet,
To those tall ships, remotest of the fleet,
Where lie great Ajax and the king of Crete.
To rouse the Spartan I myself decree;
Dear as he is to us, and dear to thee,
Yet must I tax his sloth, that claims no share
With his great brother in his martial care:
Him it behoved to every chief to sue,
Preventing every part perform'd by you;
For strong necessity our toils demands,
Claims all our hearts, and urges all our hands."

To whom the king: "With reverence we allow
Thy just rebukes, yet learn to spare them now:
My generous brother is of gentle kind,
He seems remiss, but bears a valiant mind;
Through too much deference to our sovereign sway,
Content to follow when we lead the way:
But now, our ills industrious to prevent,
Long ere the rest he rose, and sought my tent.
The chiefs you named, already at his call,
Prepare to meet us near the navy-wall;
Assembling there, between the trench and gates,
Near the night-guards, our chosen council waits."

"Then none (said Nestor) shall his rule withstand,
For great examples justify command."
With that, the venerable warrior rose;
The shining greaves his manly legs enclose;
His purple mantle golden buckles join'd,
Warm with the softest wool, and doubly lined.
Then rushing from his tent, he snatch'd in haste
His steely lance, that lighten'd as he pass'd.
The camp he traversed through the sleeping crowd,
Stopp'd at Ulysses' tent, and call'd aloud.
Ulysses, sudden as the voice was sent,
Awakes, starts up, and issues from his tent.
"What new distress, what sudden cause of fright,
Thus leads you wandering in the silent night?"
"O prudent chief! (the Pylian sage replied)
Wise as thou art, be now thy wisdom tried:
Whatever means of safety can be sought,
Whatever counsels can inspire our thought,
Whatever methods, or to fly or fight;
All, all depend on this important night!"
He heard, return'd, and took his painted shield;
Then join'd the chiefs, and follow'd through the field.
Without his tent, bold Diomed they found,
All sheathed in arms, his brave companions round:
Each sunk in sleep, extended on the field,
His head reclining on his bossy shield.
A wood of spears stood by, that, fix'd upright,
Shot from their flashing points a quivering light.
A bull's black hide composed the hero's bed;
A splendid carpet roll'd beneath his head.
Then, with his foot, old Nestor gently shakes
The slumbering chief, and in these words awakes:

"Rise, son of Tydeus! to the brave and strong
Rest seems inglorious, and the night too long.
But sleep'st thou now, when from yon hill the foe
Hangs o'er the fleet, and shades our walls below?"

At this, soft slumber from his eyelids fled;
The warrior saw the hoary chief, and said:
"Wondrous old man! whose soul no respite knows,
Though years and honours bid thee seek repose,
Let younger Greeks our sleeping warriors wake;
Ill fits thy age these toils to undertake."
"My friend, (he answered,) generous is thy care;
These toils, my subjects and my sons might bear;
Their loyal thoughts and pious love conspire
To ease a sovereign and relieve a sire:
But now the last despair surrounds our host;
No hour must pass, no moment must be lost;
Each single Greek, in this conclusive strife,
Stands on the sharpest edge of death or life:
Yet, if my years thy kind regard engage,
Employ thy youth as I employ my age;
Succeed to these my cares, and rouse the rest;
He serves me most, who serves his country best."

This said, the hero o'er his shoulders flung
A lion's spoils, that to his ankles hung;
Then seized his ponderous lance, and strode along.
Meges the bold, with Ajax famed for speed,
The warrior roused, and to the entrenchments lead.

And now the chiefs approach the nightly guard;
A wakeful squadron, each in arms prepared:
The unwearied watch their listening leaders keep,
And, couching close, repel invading sleep.
So faithful dogs their fleecy charge maintain,
With toil protected from the prowling train;
When the gaunt lioness, with hunger bold,
Springs from the mountains toward the guarded fold:
Through breaking woods her rustling course they hear;
Loud, and more loud, the clamours strike their ear
Of hounds and men: they start, they gaze around,
Watch every side, and turn to every sound.
Thus watch'd the Grecians, cautious of surprise,
Each voice, each motion, drew their ears and eyes:
Each step of passing feet increased the affright;
And hostile Troy was ever full in sight.
Nestor with joy the wakeful band survey'd,
And thus accosted through the gloomy shade.
"'Tis well, my sons! your nightly cares employ;
Else must our host become the scorn of Troy.
Watch thus, and Greece shall live." The hero said;
Then o'er the trench the following chieftains led.
His son, and godlike Merion, march'd behind
(For these the princes to their council join'd).
The trenches pass'd, the assembled kings around
In silent state the consistory crown'd.
A place there was, yet undefiled with gore,
The spot where Hector stopp'd his rage before;
When night descending, from his vengeful hand
Reprieved the relics of the Grecian band:
(The plain beside with mangled corps was spread,
And all his progress mark'd by heaps of dead:)
There sat the mournful kings: when Neleus' son,
The council opening, in these words begun:

"Is there (said he) a chief so greatly brave,
His life to hazard, and his country save?
Lives there a man, who singly dares to go
To yonder camp, or seize some straggling foe?
Or favour'd by the night approach so near,
Their speech, their counsels, and designs to hear?
If to besiege our navies they prepare,
Or Troy once more must be the seat of war?
This could he learn, and to our peers recite,
And pass unharm'd the dangers of the night;
What fame were his through all succeeding days,
While Phoebus shines, or men have tongues to praise!
What gifts his grateful country would bestow!
What must not Greece to her deliverer owe?
A sable ewe each leader should provide,
With each a sable lambkin by her side;
At every rite his share should be increased,
And his the foremost honours of the feast."

Fear held them mute: alone, untaught to fear,
Tydides spoke--"The man you seek is here.
Through yon black camps to bend my dangerous way,
Some god within commands, and I obey.
But let some other chosen warrior join,
To raise my hopes, and second my design.
By mutual confidence and mutual aid,
Great deeds are done, and great discoveries made;
The wise new prudence from the wise acquire,
And one brave hero fans another's fire."

Contending leaders at the word arose;
Each generous breast with emulation glows;
So brave a task each Ajax strove to share,
Bold Merion strove, and Nestor's valiant heir;
The Spartan wish'd the second place to gain,
And great Ulysses wish'd, nor wish'd in vain.
Then thus the king of men the contest ends:
"Thou first of warriors, and thou best of friends,
Undaunted Diomed! what chief to join
In this great enterprise, is only thine.
Just be thy choice, without affection made;
To birth, or office, no respect be paid;
Let worth determine here." The monarch spake,
And inly trembled for his brother's sake.

"Then thus (the godlike Diomed rejoin'd)
My choice declares the impulse of my mind.
How can I doubt, while great Ulysses stands
To lend his counsels and assist our hands?
A chief, whose safety is Minerva's care;
So famed, so dreadful, in the works of war:
Bless'd in his conduct, I no aid require;
Wisdom like his might pass through flames of fire."

"It fits thee not, before these chiefs of fame,
(Replied the sage,) to praise me, or to blame:
Praise from a friend, or censure from a foe,
Are lost on hearers that our merits know.
But let us haste--Night rolls the hours away,
The reddening orient shows the coming day,
The stars shine fainter on the ethereal plains,
And of night's empire but a third remains."

Thus having spoke, with generous ardour press'd,
In arms terrific their huge limbs they dress'd.
A two-edged falchion Thrasymed the brave,
And ample buckler, to Tydides gave:
Then in a leathern helm he cased his head,
Short of its crest, and with no plume o'erspread:
(Such as by youths unused to arms are worn:)
No spoils enrich it, and no studs adorn.
Next him Ulysses took a shining sword,
A bow and quiver, with bright arrows stored:
A well-proved casque, with leather braces bound,
(Thy gift, Meriones,) his temples crown'd;
Soft wool within; without, in order spread,
A boar's white teeth grinn'd horrid o'er his head.
This from Amyntor, rich Ormenus' son,
Autolycus by fraudful rapine won,
And gave Amphidamas; from him the prize
Molus received, the pledge of social ties;
The helmet next by Merion was possess'd,
And now Ulysses' thoughtful temples press'd.
Thus sheathed in arms, the council they forsake,
And dark through paths oblique their progress take.
Just then, in sign she favour'd their intent,
A long-wing'd heron great Minerva sent:
This, though surrounding shades obscured their view.
By the shrill clang and whistling wings they knew.
As from the right she soar'd, Ulysses pray'd,
Hail'd the glad omen, and address'd the maid:

"O daughter of that god whose arm can wield
The avenging bolt, and shake the dreadful shield!
O thou! for ever present in my way,
Who all my motions, all my toils survey!
Safe may we pass beneath the gloomy shade,
Safe by thy succour to our ships convey'd,
And let some deed this signal night adorn,
To claim the tears of Trojans yet unborn."

Then godlike Diomed preferr'd his prayer:
"Daughter of Jove, unconquer'd Pallas! hear.
Great queen of arms, whose favour Tydeus won,
As thou defend'st the sire, defend the son.
When on sopus' banks the banded powers
Of Greece he left, and sought the Theban towers,
Peace was his charge; received with peaceful show,
He went a legate, but return'd a foe:
Then help'd by thee, and cover'd by thy shield,
He fought with numbers, and made numbers yield.
So now be present, O celestial maid!
So still continue to the race thine aid!
A youthful steer shall fall beneath the stroke,
Untamed, unconscious of the galling yoke,
With ample forehead, and with spreading horns,
Whose taper tops refulgent gold adorns."
The heroes pray'd, and Pallas from the skies
Accords their vow, succeeds their enterprise.
Now, like two lions panting for the prey,
With dreadful thoughts they trace the dreary way,
Through the black horrors of the ensanguined plain,
Through dust, through blood, o'er arms, and hills of slain.

Nor less bold Hector, and the sons of Troy,
On high designs the wakeful hours employ;
The assembled peers their lofty chief enclosed;
Who thus the counsels of his breast proposed:

"What glorious man, for high attempts prepared,
Dares greatly venture for a rich reward?
Of yonder fleet a bold discovery make,
What watch they keep, and what resolves they take?
If now subdued they meditate their flight,
And, spent with toil, neglect the watch of night?
His be the chariot that shall please him most,
Of all the plunder of the vanquish'd host;
His the fair steeds that all the rest excel,
And his the glory to have served so well."

A youth there was among the tribes of Troy,
Dolon his name, Eumedes' only boy,
(Five girls beside the reverend herald told.)
Rich was the son in brass, and rich in gold;
Not bless'd by nature with the charms of face,
But swift of foot, and matchless in the race.
"Hector! (he said) my courage bids me meet
This high achievement, and explore the fleet:
But first exalt thy sceptre to the skies,
And swear to grant me the demanded prize;
The immortal coursers, and the glittering car,
That bear Pelides through the ranks of war.
Encouraged thus, no idle scout I go,
Fulfil thy wish, their whole intention know,
Even to the royal tent pursue my way,
And all their counsels, all their aims betray."

The chief then heaved the golden sceptre high,
Attesting thus the monarch of the sky:
"Be witness thou! immortal lord of all!
Whose thunder shakes the dark aerial hall:
By none but Dolon shall this prize be borne,
And him alone the immortal steeds adorn."

Thus Hector swore: the gods were call'd in vain,
But the rash youth prepares to scour the plain:
Across his back the bended bow he flung,
A wolf's grey hide around his shoulders hung,
A ferret's downy fur his helmet lined,
And in his hand a pointed javelin shined.
Then (never to return) he sought the shore,
And trod the path his feet must tread no more.
Scarce had he pass'd the steeds and Trojan throng,
(Still bending forward as he coursed along,)
When, on the hollow way, the approaching tread
Ulysses mark'd, and thus to Diomed;

"O friend! I hear some step of hostile feet,
Moving this way, or hastening to the fleet;
Some spy, perhaps, to lurk beside the main;
Or nightly pillager that strips the slain.
Yet let him pass, and win a little space;
Then rush behind him, and prevent his pace.
But if too swift of foot he flies before,
Confine his course along the fleet and shore,
Betwixt the camp and him our spears employ,
And intercept his hoped return to Troy."

With that they stepp'd aside, and stoop'd their head,
(As Dolon pass'd,) behind a heap of dead:
Along the path the spy unwary flew;
Soft, at just distance, both the chiefs pursue.
So distant they, and such the space between,
As when two teams of mules divide the green,
(To whom the hind like shares of land allows,)
When now new furrows part the approaching ploughs.
Now Dolon, listening, heard them as they pass'd;
Hector (he thought) had sent, and check'd his haste,
Till scarce at distance of a javelin's throw,
No voice succeeding, he perceived the foe.
As when two skilful hounds the leveret wind;
Or chase through woods obscure the trembling hind;
Now lost, now seen, they intercept his way,
And from the herd still turn the flying prey:
So fast, and with such fears, the Trojan flew;
So close, so constant, the bold Greeks pursue.
Now almost on the fleet the dastard falls,
And mingles with the guards that watch the walls;
When brave Tydides stopp'd; a gen'rous thought
(Inspired by Pallas) in his bosom wrought,
Lest on the foe some forward Greek advance,
And snatch the glory from his lifted lance.
Then thus aloud: "Whoe'er thou art, remain;
This javelin else shall fix thee to the plain."
He said, and high in air the weapon cast,
Which wilful err'd, and o'er his shoulder pass'd;
Then fix'd in earth. Against the trembling wood
The wretch stood propp'd, and quiver'd as he stood;
A sudden palsy seized his turning head;
His loose teeth chatter'd, and his colour fled;
The panting warriors seize him as he stands,
And with unmanly tears his life demands.

"O spare my youth, and for the breath I owe,
Large gifts of price my father shall bestow:
Vast heaps of brass shall in your ships be told,
And steel well-temper'd and refulgent gold."

To whom Ulysses made this wise reply:
"Whoe'er thou art, be bold, nor fear to die.
What moves thee, say, when sleep has closed the sight,
To roam the silent fields in dead of night?
Cam'st thou the secrets of our camp to find,
By Hector prompted, or thy daring mind?
Or art some wretch by hopes of plunder led,
Through heaps of carnage, to despoil the dead?"

Then thus pale Dolon, with a fearful look:
(Still, as he spoke, his limbs with horror shook:)
"Hither I came, by Hector's words deceived;
Much did he promise, rashly I believed:
No less a bribe than great Achilles' car,
And those swift steeds that sweep the ranks of war,
Urged me, unwilling, this attempt to make;
To learn what counsels, what resolves you take:
If now subdued, you fix your hopes on flight,
And, tired with toils, neglect the watch of night."

"Bold was thy aim, and glorious was the prize,
(Ulysses, with a scornful smile, replies,)
Far other rulers those proud steeds demand,
And scorn the guidance of a vulgar hand;
Even great Achilles scarce their rage can tame,
Achilles sprung from an immortal dame.
But say, be faithful, and the truth recite!
Where lies encamp'd the Trojan chief to-night?
Where stand his coursers? in what quarter sleep
Their other princes? tell what watch they keep:
Say, since this conquest, what their counsels are;
Or here to combat, from their city far,
Or back to Ilion's walls transfer the war?"

Ulysses thus, and thus Eumedes' son:
"What Dolon knows, his faithful tongue shall own.
Hector, the peers assembling in his tent,
A council holds at Ilus' monument.
No certain guards the nightly watch partake;
Where'er yon fires ascend, the Trojans wake:
Anxious for Troy, the guard the natives keep;
Safe in their cares, the auxiliar forces sleep,
Whose wives and infants, from the danger far,
Discharge their souls of half the fears of war."

"Then sleep those aids among the Trojan train,
(Inquired the chief,) or scattered o'er the plain?"
To whom the spy: "Their powers they thus dispose
The Paeons, dreadful with their bended bows,
The Carians, Caucons, the Pelasgian host,
And Leleges, encamp along the coast.
Not distant far, lie higher on the land
The Lycian, Mysian, and Maeonian band,
And Phrygia's horse, by Thymbras' ancient wall;
The Thracians utmost, and apart from all.
These Troy but lately to her succour won,
Led on by Rhesus, great Eioneus' son:
I saw his coursers in proud triumph go,
Swift as the wind, and white as winter-snow;
Rich silver plates his shining car infold;
His solid arms, refulgent, flame with gold;
No mortal shoulders suit the glorious load,
Celestial panoply, to grace a god!
Let me, unhappy, to your fleet be borne,
Or leave me here, a captive's fate to mourn,
In cruel chains, till your return reveal
The truth or falsehood of the news I tell."

To this Tydides, with a gloomy frown:
"Think not to live, though all the truth be shown:
Shall we dismiss thee, in some future strife
To risk more bravely thy now forfeit life?
Or that again our camps thou may'st explore?
No--once a traitor, thou betray'st no more."

Sternly he spoke, and as the wretch prepared
With humble blandishment to stroke his beard,
Like lightning swift the wrathful falchion flew,
Divides the neck, and cuts the nerves in two;
One instant snatch'd his trembling soul to hell,
The head, yet speaking, mutter'd as it fell.
The furry helmet from his brow they tear,
The wolf's grey hide, the unbended bow and spear;
These great Ulysses lifting to the skies,
To favouring Pallas dedicates the prize:

"Great queen of arms, receive this hostile spoil,
And let the Thracian steeds reward our toil;
Thee, first of all the heavenly host, we praise;
O speed our labours, and direct our ways!"
This said, the spoils, with dropping gore defaced,
High on a spreading tamarisk he placed;
Then heap'd with reeds and gathered boughs the plain,
To guide their footsteps to the place again.

Through the still night they cross the devious fields,
Slippery with blood, o'er arms and heaps of shields,
Arriving where the Thracian squadrons lay,
And eased in sleep the labours of the day.
Ranged in three lines they view the prostrate band:
The horses yoked beside each warrior stand.
Their arms in order on the ground reclined,
Through the brown shade the fulgid weapons shined:
Amidst lay Rhesus, stretch'd in sleep profound,
And the white steeds behind his chariot bound.
The welcome sight Ulysses first descries,
And points to Diomed the tempting prize.
"The man, the coursers, and the car behold!
Described by Dolon, with the arms of gold.
Now, brave Tydides! now thy courage try,
Approach the chariot, and the steeds untie;
Or if thy soul aspire to fiercer deeds,
Urge thou the slaughter, while I seize the steeds."

Pallas (this said) her hero's bosom warms,
Breathed in his heart, and strung his nervous arms;
Where'er he pass'd, a purple stream pursued
His thirsty falchion, fat with hostile blood,
Bathed all his footsteps, dyed the fields with gore,
And a low groan remurmur'd through the shore.
So the grim lion, from his nightly den,
O'erleaps the fences, and invades the pen,
On sheep or goats, resistless in his way,
He falls, and foaming rends the guardless prey;
Nor stopp'd the fury of his vengeful hand,
Till twelve lay breathless of the Thracian band.
Ulysses following, as his partner slew,
Back by the foot each slaughter'd warrior drew;
The milk-white coursers studious to convey
Safe to the ships, he wisely cleared the way:
Lest the fierce steeds, not yet to battles bred,
Should start, and tremble at the heaps of dead.
Now twelve despatch'd, the monarch last they found;
Tydides' falchion fix'd him to the ground.
Just then a deathful dream Minerva sent,
A warlike form appear'd before his tent,
Whose visionary steel his bosom tore:
So dream'd the monarch, and awaked no more.

Ulysses now the snowy steeds detains,
And leads them, fasten'd by the silver reins;
These, with his bow unbent, he lash'd along;
(The scourge forgot, on Rhesus' chariot hung;)
Then gave his friend the signal to retire;
But him, new dangers, new achievements fire;
Doubtful he stood, or with his reeking blade
To send more heroes to the infernal shade,
Drag off the car where Rhesus' armour lay,
Or heave with manly force, and lift away.
While unresolved the son of Tydeus stands,
Pallas appears, and thus her chief commands:

"Enough, my son; from further slaughter cease,
Regard thy safety, and depart in peace;
Haste to the ships, the gotten spoils enjoy,
Nor tempt too far the hostile gods of Troy."

The voice divine confess'd the martial maid;
In haste he mounted, and her word obey'd;
The coursers fly before Ulysses' bow,
Swift as the wind, and white as winter-snow.

Not unobserved they pass'd: the god of light
Had watch'd his Troy, and mark'd Minerva's flight,
Saw Tydeus' son with heavenly succour bless'd,
And vengeful anger fill'd his sacred breast.
Swift to the Trojan camp descends the power,
And wakes Hippocoon in the morning-hour;
(On Rhesus' side accustom'd to attend,
A faithful kinsman, and instructive friend;)
He rose, and saw the field deform'd with blood,
An empty space where late the coursers stood,
The yet-warm Thracians panting on the coast;
For each he wept, but for his Rhesus most:
Now while on Rhesus' name he calls in vain,
The gathering tumult spreads o'er all the plain;
On heaps the Trojans rush, with wild affright,
And wondering view the slaughters of the night.

Meanwhile the chiefs, arriving at the shade
Where late the spoils of Hector's spy were laid,
Ulysses stopp'd; to him Tydides bore
The trophy, dropping yet with Dolon's gore:
Then mounts again; again their nimbler feet
The coursers ply, and thunder towards the fleet.

Old Nestor first perceived the approaching sound,
Bespeaking thus the Grecian peers around:
"Methinks the noise of trampling steeds I hear,
Thickening this way, and gathering on my ear;
Perhaps some horses of the Trojan breed
(So may, ye gods! my pious hopes succeed)
The great Tydides and Ulysses bear,
Return'd triumphant with this prize of war.
Yet much I fear (ah, may that fear be vain!)
The chiefs outnumber'd by the Trojan train;
Perhaps, even now pursued, they seek the shore;
Or, oh! perhaps those heroes are no more."

Scarce had he spoke, when, lo! the chiefs appear,
And spring to earth; the Greeks dismiss their fear:
With words of friendship and extended hands
They greet the kings; and Nestor first demands:

"Say thou, whose praises all our host proclaim,
Thou living glory of the Grecian name!
Say whence these coursers? by what chance bestow'd,
The spoil of foes, or present of a god?
Not those fair steeds, so radiant and so gay,
That draw the burning chariot of the day.
Old as I am, to age I scorn to yield,
And daily mingle in the martial field;
But sure till now no coursers struck my sight
Like these, conspicuous through the ranks of fight.
Some god, I deem, conferred the glorious prize,
Bless'd as ye are, and favourites of the skies;
The care of him who bids the thunder roar,
And her, whose fury bathes the world with gore."

"Father! not so, (sage Ithacus rejoin'd,)
The gifts of heaven are of a nobler kind.
Of Thracian lineage are the steeds ye view,
Whose hostile king the brave Tydides slew;
Sleeping he died, with all his guards around,
And twelve beside lay gasping on the ground.
These other spoils from conquer'd Dolon came,
A wretch, whose swiftness was his only fame;
By Hector sent our forces to explore,
He now lies headless on the sandy shore."

Then o'er the trench the bounding coursers flew;
The joyful Greeks with loud acclaim pursue.
Straight to Tydides' high pavilion borne,
The matchless steeds his ample stalls adorn:
The neighing coursers their new fellows greet,
And the full racks are heap'd with generous wheat.
But Dolon's armour, to his ships convey'd,
High on the painted stern Ulysses laid,
A trophy destin'd to the blue-eyed maid.

Now from nocturnal sweat and sanguine stain
They cleanse their bodies in the neighb'ring main:
Then in the polished bath, refresh'd from toil,
Their joints they supple with dissolving oil,
In due repast indulge the genial hour,
And first to Pallas the libations pour:
They sit, rejoicing in her aid divine,
And the crown'd goblet foams with floods of wine.

The saffron morn, with early blushes spread,
Now rose refulgent from Tithonus' bed;
With new-born day to gladden mortal sight,
And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light:
When baleful Eris, sent by Jove's command,
The torch of discord blazing in her hand,
Through the red skies her bloody sign extends,
And, wrapt in tempests, o'er the fleet descends.
High on Ulysses' bark her horrid stand
She took, and thunder'd through the seas and land.

Even Ajax and Achilles heard the sound,
Whose ships, remote, the guarded navy bound,
Thence the black fury through the Grecian throng
With horror sounds the loud Orthian song:
The navy shakes, and at the dire alarms
Each bosom boils, each warrior starts to arms.
No more they sigh, inglorious to return,
But breathe revenge, and for the combat burn.

The king of men his hardy host inspires
With loud command, with great example fires!
Himself first rose, himself before the rest
His mighty limbs in radiant armour dress'd,
And first he cased his manly legs around
In shining greaves with silver buckles bound;
The beaming cuirass next adorn'd his breast,
The same which once king Cinyras possess'd:
(The fame of Greece and her assembled host
Had reach'd that monarch on the Cyprian coast;
'Twas then, the friendship of the chief to gain,
This glorious gift he sent, nor sent in vain:)
Ten rows of azure steel the work infold,
Twice ten of tin, and twelve of ductile gold;
Three glittering dragons to the gorget rise,
Whose imitated scales against the skies
Reflected various light, and arching bow'd,
Like colour'd rainbows o'er a showery cloud
(Jove's wondrous bow, of three celestial dies,
Placed as a sign to man amidst the skies).
A radiant baldric, o'er his shoulder tied,
Sustain'd the sword that glitter'd at his side:
Gold was the hilt, a silver sheath encased
The shining blade, and golden hangers graced.
His buckler's mighty orb was next display'd,
That round the warrior cast a dreadful shade;
Ten zones of brass its ample brim surround,
And twice ten bosses the bright convex crown'd:
Tremendous Gorgon frown'd upon its field,
And circling terrors fill'd the expressive shield:
Within its concave hung a silver thong,
On which a mimic serpent creeps along,
His azure length in easy waves extends,
Till in three heads the embroider'd monster ends.
Last o'er his brows his fourfold helm he placed,
With nodding horse-hair formidably graced;
And in his hands two steely javelins wields,
That blaze to heaven, and lighten all the fields.

That instant Juno, and the martial maid,
In happy thunders promised Greece their aid;
High o'er the chief they clash'd their arms in air,
And, leaning from the clouds, expect the war.

Close to the limits of the trench and mound,
The fiery coursers to their chariots bound
The squires restrain'd: the foot, with those who wield
The lighter arms, rush forward to the field.
To second these, in close array combined,
The squadrons spread their sable wings behind.
Now shouts and tumults wake the tardy sun,
As with the light the warriors' toils begun.
Even Jove, whose thunder spoke his wrath, distill'd
Red drops of blood o'er all the fatal field;
The woes of men unwilling to survey,
And all the slaughters that must stain the day.

Near Ilus' tomb, in order ranged around,
The Trojan lines possess'd the rising ground:
There wise Polydamas and Hector stood;
neas, honour'd as a guardian god;
Bold Polybus, Agenor the divine;
The brother-warriors of Antenor's line:
With youthful Acamas, whose beauteous face
And fair proportion match'd the ethereal race.
Great Hector, cover'd with his spacious shield,
Plies all the troops, and orders all the field.
As the red star now shows his sanguine fires
Through the dark clouds, and now in night retires,
Thus through the ranks appear'd the godlike man,
Plunged in the rear, or blazing in the van;
While streamy sparkles, restless as he flies,
Flash from his arms, as lightning from the skies.
As sweating reapers in some wealthy field,
Ranged in two bands, their crooked weapons wield,
Bear down the furrows, till their labours meet;
Thick fall the heapy harvests at their feet:
So Greece and Troy the field of war divide,
And falling ranks are strow'd on every side.
None stoop'd a thought to base inglorious flight;
But horse to horse, and man to man they fight,
Not rabid wolves more fierce contest their prey;
Each wounds, each bleeds, but none resign the day.
Discord with joy the scene of death descries,
And drinks large slaughter at her sanguine eyes:
Discord alone, of all the immortal train,
Swells the red horrors of this direful plain:
The gods in peace their golden mansions fill,
Ranged in bright order on the Olympian hill:
But general murmurs told their griefs above,
And each accused the partial will of Jove.
Meanwhile apart, superior, and alone,
The eternal Monarch, on his awful throne,
Wrapt in the blaze of boundless glory sate;
And fix'd, fulfill'd the just decrees of fate.
On earth he turn'd his all-considering eyes,
And mark'd the spot where Ilion's towers arise;
The sea with ships, the fields with armies spread,
The victor's rage, the dying, and the dead.

Thus while the morning-beams, increasing bright,
O'er heaven's pure azure spread the glowing light,
Commutual death the fate of war confounds,
Each adverse battle gored with equal wounds.
But now (what time in some sequester'd vale
The weary woodman spreads his sparing meal,
When his tired arms refuse the axe to rear,
And claim a respite from the sylvan war;
But not till half the prostrate forests lay
Stretch'd in long ruin, and exposed to day)
Then, nor till then, the Greeks' impulsive might
Pierced the black phalanx, and let in the light.
Great Agamemnon then the slaughter led,
And slew Bienor at his people's head:
Whose squire Oileus, with a sudden spring,
Leap'd from the chariot to revenge his king;
But in his front he felt the fatal wound,
Which pierced his brain, and stretch'd him on the ground.
Atrides spoil'd, and left them on the plain:
Vain was their youth, their glittering armour vain:
Now soil'd with dust, and naked to the sky,
Their snowy limbs and beauteous bodies lie.

Two sons of Priam next to battle move,
The product, one of marriage, one of love:
In the same car the brother-warriors ride;
This took the charge to combat, that to guide:
Far other task, than when they wont to keep,
On Ida's tops, their father's fleecy sheep.
These on the mountains once Achilles found,
And captive led, with pliant osiers bound;
Then to their sire for ample sums restored;
But now to perish by Atrides' sword:
Pierced in the breast the base-born Isus bleeds:
Cleft through the head his brother's fate succeeds,
Swift to the spoil the hasty victor falls,
And, stript, their features to his mind recalls.
The Trojans see the youths untimely die,
But helpless tremble for themselves, and fly.
So when a lion ranging o'er the lawns.
Finds, on some grassy lair, the couching fawns,
Their bones he cracks, their reeking vitals draws,
And grinds the quivering flesh with bloody jaws;
The frighted hind beholds, and dares not stay,
But swift through rustling thickets bursts her way;
All drown'd in sweat, the panting mother flies,
And the big tears roll trickling from her eyes.

Amidst the tumult of the routed train,
The sons of false Antimachus were slain;
He who for bribes his faithless counsels sold,
And voted Helen's stay for Paris' gold.
Atrides mark'd, as these their safety sought,
And slew the children for the father's fault;
Their headstrong horse unable to restrain,
They shook with fear, and dropp'd the silken rein;
Then in the chariot on their knees they fall,
And thus with lifted hands for mercy call:

"O spare our youth, and for the life we owe,
Antimachus shall copious gifts bestow:
Soon as he hears, that, not in battle slain,
The Grecian ships his captive sons detain,
Large heaps of brass in ransom shall be told,
And steel well-tempered, and persuasive gold."

These words, attended with the flood of tears,
The youths address'd to unrelenting ears:
The vengeful monarch gave this stern reply:
"If from Antimachus ye spring, ye die;
The daring wretch who once in council stood
To shed Ulysses' and my brother's blood,
For proffer'd peace! and sues his seed for grace?
No, die, and pay the forfeit of your race."

This said, Pisander from the car he cast,
And pierced his breast: supine he breathed his last.
His brother leap'd to earth; but, as he lay,
The trenchant falchion lopp'd his hands away;
His sever'd head was toss'd among the throng,
And, rolling, drew a bloody train along.
Then, where the thickest fought, the victor flew;
The king's example all his Greeks pursue.
Now by the foot the flying foot were slain,
Horse trod by horse, lay foaming on the plain.
From the dry fields thick clouds of dust arise,
Shade the black host, and intercept the skies.
The brass-hoof'd steeds tumultuous plunge and bound,
And the thick thunder beats the labouring ground,
Still slaughtering on, the king of men proceeds;
The distanced army wonders at his deeds,
As when the winds with raging flames conspire,
And o'er the forests roll the flood of fire,
In blazing heaps the grove's old honours fall,
And one refulgent ruin levels all:
Before Atrides' rage so sinks the foe,
Whole squadrons vanish, and proud heads lie low.
The steeds fly trembling from his waving sword,
And many a car, now lighted of its lord,
Wide o'er the field with guideless fury rolls,
Breaking their ranks, and crushing out their souls;
While his keen falchion drinks the warriors' lives;
More grateful, now, to vultures than their wives!

Perhaps great Hector then had found his fate,
But Jove and destiny prolong'd his date.
Safe from the darts, the care of heaven he stood,
Amidst alarms, and death, and dust, and blood.

Now past the tomb where ancient Ilus lay,
Through the mid field the routed urge their way:
Where the wild figs the adjoining summit crown,
The path they take, and speed to reach the town.
As swift, Atrides with loud shouts pursued,
Hot with his toil, and bathed in hostile blood.
Now near the beech-tree, and the Scaean gates,
The hero halts, and his associates waits.
Meanwhile on every side around the plain,
Dispersed, disorder'd, fly the Trojan train.
So flies a herd of beeves, that hear dismay'd
The lion's roaring through the midnight shade;
On heaps they tumble with successless haste;
The savage seizes, draws, and rends the last.
Not with less fury stern Atrides flew,
Still press'd the rout, and still the hindmost slew;
Hurl'd from their cars the bravest chiefs are kill'd,
And rage, and death, and carnage load the field.

Now storms the victor at the Trojan wall;
Surveys the towers, and meditates their fall.
But Jove descending shook the Idaean hills,
And down their summits pour'd a hundred rills:
The unkindled lightning in his hand he took,
And thus the many-coloured maid bespoke:

"Iris, with haste thy golden wings display,
To godlike Hector this our word convey--
While Agamemnon wastes the ranks around,
Fights in the front, and bathes with blood the ground,
Bid him give way; but issue forth commands,
And trust the war to less important hands:
But when, or wounded by the spear or dart,
That chief shall mount his chariot, and depart,
Then Jove shall string his arm, and fire his breast,
Then to her ships shall flying Greece be press'd,
Till to the main the burning sun descend,
And sacred night her awful shade extend."

He spoke, and Iris at his word obey'd;
On wings of winds descends the various maid.
The chief she found amidst the ranks of war,
Close to the bulwarks, on his glittering car.
The goddess then: "O son of Priam, hear!
From Jove I come, and his high mandate bear.
While Agamemnon wastes the ranks around,
Fights in the front, and bathes with blood the ground,
Abstain from fight; yet issue forth commands,
And trust the war to less important hands:
But when, or wounded by the spear or dart,
The chief shall mount his chariot, and depart,
Then Jove shall string thy arm, and fire thy breast,
Then to her ships shall flying Greece be press'd,
Till to the main the burning sun descend,
And sacred night her awful shade extend."

She said, and vanish'd. Hector, with a bound,
Springs from his chariot on the trembling ground,
In clanging arms: he grasps in either hand
A pointed lance, and speeds from band to band;
Revives their ardour, turns their steps from flight,
And wakes anew the dying flames of fight.
They stand to arms: the Greeks their onset dare,
Condense their powers, and wait the coming war.
New force, new spirit, to each breast returns;
The fight renew'd with fiercer fury burns:
The king leads on: all fix on him their eye,
And learn from him to conquer, or to die.

Ye sacred nine! celestial Muses! tell,
Who faced him first, and by his prowess fell?
The great Iphidamas, the bold and young,
From sage Antenor and Theano sprung;
Whom from his youth his grandsire Cisseus bred,
And nursed in Thrace where snowy flocks are fed.
Scarce did the down his rosy cheeks invest,
And early honour warm his generous breast,
When the kind sire consign'd his daughter's charms
(Theano's sister) to his youthful arms.
But call'd by glory to the wars of Troy,
He leaves untasted the first fruits of joy;
From his loved bride departs with melting eyes,
And swift to aid his dearer country flies.
With twelve black ships he reach'd Percope's strand,
Thence took the long laborious march by land.
Now fierce for fame, before the ranks he springs,
Towering in arms, and braves the king of kings.
Atrides first discharged the missive spear;
The Trojan stoop'd, the javelin pass'd in air.
Then near the corslet, at the monarch's heart,
With all his strength, the youth directs his dart:
But the broad belt, with plates of silver bound,
The point rebated, and repell'd the wound.
Encumber'd with the dart, Atrides stands,
Till, grasp'd with force, he wrench'd it from his hands;
At once his weighty sword discharged a wound
Full on his neck, that fell'd him to the ground.
Stretch'd in the dust the unhappy warrior lies,
And sleep eternal seals his swimming eyes.
Oh worthy better fate! oh early slain!
Thy country's friend; and virtuous, though in vain!
No more the youth shall join his consort's side,
At once a virgin, and at once a bride!
No more with presents her embraces meet,
Or lay the spoils of conquest at her feet,
On whom his passion, lavish of his store,
Bestow'd so much, and vainly promised more!
Unwept, uncover'd, on the plain he lay,
While the proud victor bore his arms away.

Coon, Antenor's eldest hope, was nigh:
Tears, at the sight, came starting from his eye,
While pierced with grief the much-loved youth he view'd,
And the pale features now deform'd with blood.
Then, with his spear, unseen, his time he took,
Aim'd at the king, and near his elbow strook.
The thrilling steel transpierced the brawny part,
And through his arm stood forth the barbed dart.
Surprised the monarch feels, yet void of fear
On Coon rushes with his lifted spear:
His brother's corpse the pious Trojan draws,
And calls his country to assert his cause;
Defends him breathless on the sanguine field,
And o'er the body spreads his ample shield.
Atrides, marking an unguarded part,
Transfix'd the warrior with his brazen dart;
Prone on his brother's bleeding breast he lay,
The monarch's falchion lopp'd his head away:
The social shades the same dark journey go,
And join each other in the realms below.

The vengeful victor rages round the fields,
With every weapon art or fury yields:
By the long lance, the sword, or ponderous stone,
Whole ranks are broken, and whole troops o'erthrown.
This, while yet warm distill'd the purple flood;
But when the wound grew stiff with clotted blood,
Then grinding tortures his strong bosom rend,
Less keen those darts the fierce Ilythiae send:
(The powers that cause the teeming matron's throes,
Sad mothers of unutterable woes!)
Stung with the smart, all-panting with the pain,
He mounts the car, and gives his squire the rein;
Then with a voice which fury made more strong,
And pain augmented, thus exhorts the throng:

"O friends! O Greeks! assert your honours won;
Proceed, and finish what this arm begun:
Lo! angry Jove forbids your chief to stay,
And envies half the glories of the day."

He said: the driver whirls his lengthful thong;
The horses fly; the chariot smokes along.
Clouds from their nostrils the fierce coursers blow,
And from their sides the foam descends in snow;
Shot through the battle in a moment's space,
The wounded monarch at his tent they place.

No sooner Hector saw the king retired,
But thus his Trojans and his aids he fired:
"Hear, all ye Dardan, all ye Lycian race!
Famed in close fight, and dreadful face to face:
Now call to mind your ancient trophies won,
Your great forefathers' virtues, and your own.
Behold, the general flies! deserts his powers!
Lo, Jove himself declares the conquest ours!
Now on yon ranks impel your foaming steeds;
And, sure of glory, dare immortal deeds."

With words like these the fiery chief alarms
His fainting host, and every bosom warms.
As the bold hunter cheers his hounds to tear
The brindled lion, or the tusky bear:
With voice and hand provokes their doubting heart,
And springs the foremost with his lifted dart:
So godlike Hector prompts his troops to dare;
Nor prompts alone, but leads himself the war.
On the black body of the foe he pours;
As from the cloud's deep bosom, swell'd with showers,
A sudden storm the purple ocean sweeps,
Drives the wild waves, and tosses all the deeps.
Say, Muse! when Jove the Trojan's glory crown'd,
Beneath his arm what heroes bit the ground?
Assaeus, Dolops, and Autonous died,
Opites next was added to their side;
Then brave Hipponous, famed in many a fight,
Opheltius, Orus, sunk to endless night;
symnus, Agelaus; all chiefs of name;
The rest were vulgar deaths unknown to fame.
As when a western whirlwind, charged with storms,
Dispels the gather'd clouds that Notus forms:
The gust continued, violent and strong,
Rolls sable clouds in heaps on heaps along;
Now to the skies the foaming billows rears,
Now breaks the surge, and wide the bottom bares:
Thus, raging Hector, with resistless hands,
O'erturns, confounds, and scatters all their bands.
Now the last ruin the whole host appals;
Now Greece had trembled in her wooden walls;
But wise Ulysses call'd Tydides forth,
His soul rekindled, and awaked his worth.
"And stand we deedless, O eternal shame!
Till Hector's arm involve the ships in flame?
Haste, let us join, and combat side by side."
The warrior thus, and thus the friend replied:

"No martial toil I shun, no danger fear;
Let Hector come; I wait his fury here.
But Jove with conquest crowns the Trojan train:
And, Jove our foe, all human force is vain."

He sigh'd; but, sighing, raised his vengeful steel,
And from his car the proud Thymbraeus fell:
Molion, the charioteer, pursued his lord,
His death ennobled by Ulysses' sword.
There slain, they left them in eternal night,
Then plunged amidst the thickest ranks of fight.
So two wild boars outstrip the following hounds,
Then swift revert, and wounds return for wounds.
Stern Hector's conquests in the middle plain
Stood check'd awhile, and Greece respired again.

The sons of Merops shone amidst the war;
Towering they rode in one refulgent car:
In deep prophetic arts their father skill'd,
Had warn'd his children from the Trojan field.
Fate urged them on: the father warn'd in vain;
They rush'd to fight, and perish'd on the plain;
Their breasts no more the vital spirit warms;
The stern Tydides strips their shining arms.
Hypirochus by great Ulysses dies,
And rich Hippodamus becomes his prize.
Great Jove from Ide with slaughter fills his sight,
And level hangs the doubtful scale of fight.
By Tydeus' lance Agastrophus was slain,
The far-famed hero of Paeonian strain;
Wing'd with his fears, on foot he strove to fly,
His steeds too distant, and the foe too nigh:
Through broken orders, swifter than the wind,
He fled, but flying left his life behind.
This Hector sees, as his experienced eyes
Traverse the files, and to the rescue flies;
Shouts, as he pass'd, the crystal regions rend,
And moving armies on his march attend.
Great Diomed himself was seized with fear,
And thus bespoke his brother of the war:

"Mark how this way yon bending squadrons yield!
The storm rolls on, and Hector rules the field:
Here stand his utmost force."--The warrior said;
Swift at the word his ponderous javelin fled;
Nor miss'd its aim, but where the plumage danced
Razed the smooth cone, and thence obliquely glanced.
Safe in his helm (the gift of Phoebus' hands)
Without a wound the Trojan hero stands;
But yet so stunn'd, that, staggering on the plain.
His arm and knee his sinking bulk sustain;
O'er his dim sight the misty vapours rise,
And a short darkness shades his swimming eyes.
Tydides followed to regain his lance;
While Hector rose, recover'd from the trance,
Remounts his car, and herds amidst the crowd:
The Greek pursues him, and exults aloud:
"Once more thank Phoebus for thy forfeit breath,
Or thank that swiftness which outstrips the death.
Well by Apollo are thy prayers repaid,
And oft that partial power has lent his aid.
Thou shall not long the death deserved withstand,
If any god assist Tydides' hand.
Fly then, inglorious! but thy flight, this day,
Whole hecatombs of Trojan ghosts shall pay,"

Him, while he triumph'd, Paris eyed from far,
(The spouse of Helen, the fair cause of war;)
Around the fields his feather'd shafts he sent,
From ancient Ilus' ruin'd monument:
Behind the column placed, he bent his bow,
And wing'd an arrow at the unwary foe;
Just as he stoop'd, Agastrophus's crest
To seize, and drew the corslet from his breast,
The bowstring twang'd; nor flew the shaft in vain,
But pierced his foot, and nail'd it to the plain.
The laughing Trojan, with a joyful spring.
Leaps from his ambush, and insults the king.

"He bleeds! (he cries) some god has sped my dart!
Would the same god had fix'd it in his heart!
So Troy, relieved from that wide-wasting hand,
Should breathe from slaughter and in combat stand:
Whose sons now tremble at his darted spear,
As scatter'd lambs the rushing lion fear."

He dauntless thus: "Thou conqueror of the fair,
Thou woman-warrior with the curling hair;
Vain archer! trusting to the distant dart,
Unskill'd in arms to act a manly part!
Thou hast but done what boys or women can;
Such hands may wound, but not incense a man.
Nor boast the scratch thy feeble arrow gave,
A coward's weapon never hurts the brave.
Not so this dart, which thou may'st one day feel;
Fate wings its flight, and death is on the steel:
Where this but lights, some noble life expires;
Its touch makes orphans, bathes the cheeks of sires,
Steeps earth in purple, gluts the birds of air,
And leaves such objects as distract the fair."
Ulysses hastens with a trembling heart,
Before him steps, and bending draws the dart:
Forth flows the blood; an eager pang succeeds;
Tydides mounts, and to the navy speeds.

Now on the field Ulysses stands alone,
The Greeks all fled, the Trojans pouring on;
But stands collected in himself, and whole,
And questions thus his own unconquer'd soul:

"What further subterfuge, what hopes remain?
What shame, inglorious if I quit the plain?
What danger, singly if I stand the ground,
My friends all scatter'd, all the foes around?
Yet wherefore doubtful? let this truth suffice,
The brave meets danger, and the coward flies.
To die or conquer, proves a hero's heart;
And, knowing this, I know a soldier's part."

Such thoughts revolving in his careful breast,
Near, and more near, the shady cohorts press'd;
These, in the warrior, their own fate enclose;
And round him deep the steely circle grows.
So fares a boar whom all the troop surrounds
Of shouting huntsmen and of clamorous hounds;
He grinds his ivory tusks; he foams with ire;
His sanguine eye-balls glare with living fire;
By these, by those, on every part is plied;
And the red slaughter spreads on every side.
Pierced through the shoulder, first Deiopis fell;
Next Ennomus and Thoon sank to hell;
Chersidamas, beneath the navel thrust,
Falls prone to earth, and grasps the bloody dust.
Charops, the son of Hippasus, was near;
Ulysses reach'd him with the fatal spear;
But to his aid his brother Socus flies,
Socus the brave, the generous, and the wise.
Near as he drew, the warrior thus began:

"O great Ulysses! much-enduring man!
Not deeper skill'd in every martial sleight,
Than worn to toils, and active in the fight!
This day two brothers shall thy conquest grace,
And end at once the great Hippasian race,
Or thou beneath this lance must press the field."
He said, and forceful pierced his spacious shield:
Through the strong brass the ringing javelin thrown,
Plough'd half his side, and bared it to the bone.
By Pallas' care, the spear, though deep infix'd,
Stopp'd short of life, nor with his entrails mix'd.

The wound not mortal wise Ulysses knew,
Then furious thus (but first some steps withdrew):
"Unhappy man! whose death our hands shall grace,
Fate calls thee hence and finish'd is thy race.
Nor longer check my conquests on the foe;
But, pierced by this, to endless darkness go,
And add one spectre to the realms below!"

He spoke, while Socus, seized with sudden fright,
Trembling gave way, and turn'd his back to flight;
Between his shoulders pierced the following dart,
And held its passage through the panting heart:
Wide in his breast appear'd the grisly wound;
He falls; his armour rings against the ground.
Then thus Ulysses, gazing on the slain:
"Famed son of Hippasus! there press the plain;
There ends thy narrow span assign'd by fate,
Heaven owes Ulysses yet a longer date.
Ah, wretch! no father shall thy corpse compose;
Thy dying eyes no tender mother close;
But hungry birds shall tear those balls away,
And hovering vultures scream around their prey.
Me Greece shall honour, when I meet my doom,
With solemn funerals and a lasting tomb."

Then raging with intolerable smart,
He writhes his body, and extracts the dart.
The dart a tide of spouting gore pursued,
And gladden'd Troy with sight of hostile blood.
Now troops on troops the fainting chief invade,
Forced he recedes, and loudly calls for aid.
Thrice to its pitch his lofty voice he rears;
The well-known voice thrice Menelaus hears:
Alarm'd, to Ajax Telamon he cried,
Who shares his labours, and defends his side:
"O friend! Ulysses' shouts invade my ear;
Distressed he seems, and no assistance near;
Strong as he is, yet one opposed to all,
Oppress'd by multitudes, the best may fall.
Greece robb'd of him must bid her host despair,
And feel a loss not ages can repair."

Then, where the cry directs, his course he bends;
Great Ajax, like the god of war, attends,
The prudent chief in sore distress they found,
With bands of furious Trojans compass'd round.
As when some huntsman, with a flying spear,
From the blind thicket wounds a stately deer;
Down his cleft side, while fresh the blood distils,
He bounds aloft, and scuds from hills to hills,
Till life's warm vapour issuing through the wound,
Wild mountain-wolves the fainting beast surround:
Just as their jaws his prostrate limbs invade,
The lion rushes through the woodland shade,
The wolves, though hungry, scour dispersed away;
The lordly savage vindicates his prey.
Ulysses thus, unconquer'd by his pains,
A single warrior half a host sustains:
But soon as Ajax leaves his tower-like shield,
The scattered crowds fly frighted o'er the field;
Atrides' arm the sinking hero stays,
And, saved from numbers, to his car conveys.

Victorious Ajax plies the routed crew;
And first Doryclus, Priam's son, he slew,
On strong Pandocus next inflicts a wound,
And lays Lysander bleeding on the ground.
As when a torrent, swell'd with wintry rains,
Pours from the mountains o'er the deluged plains,
And pines and oaks, from their foundations torn,
A country's ruins! to the seas are borne:
Fierce Ajax thus o'erwhelms the yielding throng;
Men, steeds, and chariots, roll in heaps along.

But Hector, from this scene of slaughter far,
Raged on the left, and ruled the tide of war:
Loud groans proclaim his progress through the plain,
And deep Scamander swells with heaps of slain.
There Nestor and Idomeneus oppose
The warrior's fury; there the battle glows;
There fierce on foot, or from the chariot's height,
His sword deforms the beauteous ranks of fight.
The spouse of Helen, dealing darts around,
Had pierced Machaon with a distant wound:
In his right shoulder the broad shaft appear'd,
And trembling Greece for her physician fear'd.
To Nestor then Idomeneus begun:
"Glory of Greece, old Neleus' valiant son!
Ascend thy chariot, haste with speed away,
And great Machaon to the ships convey;
A wise physician skill'd our wounds to heal,
Is more than armies to the public weal."
Old Nestor mounts the seat; beside him rode
The wounded offspring of the healing god.
He lends the lash; the steeds with sounding feet
Shake the dry field, and thunder toward the fleet.

But now Cebriones, from Hector's car,
Survey'd the various fortune of the war:
"While here (he cried) the flying Greeks are slain,
Trojans on Trojans yonder load the plain.
Before great Ajax see the mingled throng
Of men and chariots driven in heaps along!
I know him well, distinguish'd o'er the field
By the broad glittering of the sevenfold shield.
Thither, O Hector, thither urge thy steeds,
There danger calls, and there the combat bleeds;
There horse and foot in mingled deaths unite,
And groans of slaughter mix with shouts of fight."

Thus having spoke, the driver's lash resounds;
Swift through the ranks the rapid chariot bounds;
Stung by the stroke, the coursers scour the fields,
O'er heaps of carcases, and hills of shields.
The horses' hoofs are bathed in heroes' gore,
And, dashing, purple all the car before;
The groaning axle sable drops distils,
And mangled carnage clogs the rapid wheels.
Here Hector, plunging through the thickest fight,
Broke the dark phalanx, and let in the light:
(By the long lance, the sword, or ponderous stone.
The ranks he scatter'd and the troops o'erthrown:)
Ajax he shuns, through all the dire debate,
And fears that arm whose force he felt so late.
But partial Jove, espousing Hector's part,
Shot heaven-bred horror through the Grecian's heart;
Confused, unnerved in Hector's presence grown,
Amazed he stood, with terrors not his own.
O'er his broad back his moony shield he threw,
And, glaring round, by tardy steps withdrew.
Thus the grim lion his retreat maintains,
Beset with watchful dogs, and shouting swains;
Repulsed by numbers from the nightly stalls,
Though rage impels him, and though hunger calls,
Long stands the showering darts, and missile fires;
Then sourly slow the indignant beast retires:
So turn'd stern Ajax, by whole hosts repell'd,
While his swoln heart at every step rebell'd.

As the slow beast, with heavy strength endued,
In some wide field by troops of boys pursued,
Though round his sides a wooden tempest rain,
Crops the tall harvest, and lays waste the plain;
Thick on his hide the hollow blows resound,
The patient animal maintains his ground,
Scarce from the field with all their efforts chased,
And stirs but slowly when he stirs at last:
On Ajax thus a weight of Trojans hung,
The strokes redoubled on his buckler rung;
Confiding now in bulky strength he stands,
Now turns, and backward bears the yielding bands;
Now stiff recedes, yet hardly seems to fly,
And threats his followers with retorted eye.
Fix'd as the bar between two warring powers,
While hissing darts descend in iron showers:
In his broad buckler many a weapon stood,
Its surface bristled with a quivering wood;
And many a javelin, guiltless on the plain,
Marks the dry dust, and thirsts for blood in vain.
But bold Eurypylus his aid imparts,
And dauntless springs beneath a cloud of darts;
Whose eager javelin launch'd against the foe,
Great Apisaon felt the fatal blow;
From his torn liver the red current flow'd,
And his slack knees desert their dying load.
The victor rushing to despoil the dead,
From Paris' bow a vengeful arrow fled;
Fix'd in his nervous thigh the weapon stood,
Fix'd was the point, but broken was the wood.
Back to the lines the wounded Greek retired,
Yet thus retreating, his associates fired:

"What god, O Grecians! has your hearts dismay'd?
Oh, turn to arms; 'tis Ajax claims your aid.
This hour he stands the mark of hostile rage,
And this the last brave battle he shall wage:
Haste, join your forces; from the gloomy grave
The warrior rescue, and your country save."
Thus urged the chief: a generous troop appears,
Who spread their bucklers, and advance their spears,
To guard their wounded friend: while thus they stand
With pious care, great Ajax joins the band:
Each takes new courage at the hero's sight;
The hero rallies, and renews the fight.

Thus raged both armies like conflicting fires,
While Nestor's chariot far from fight retires:
His coursers steep'd in sweat, and stain'd with gore,
The Greeks' preserver, great Machaon, bore.
That hour Achilles, from the topmost height
Of his proud fleet, o'erlook'd the fields of fight;
His feasted eyes beheld around the plain
The Grecian rout, the slaying, and the slain.
His friend Machaon singled from the rest,
A transient pity touch'd his vengeful breast.
Straight to Menoetius' much-loved son he sent:
Graceful as Mars, Patroclus quits his tent;
In evil hour! Then fate decreed his doom,
And fix'd the date of all his woes to come.

"Why calls my friend? thy loved injunctions lay;
Whate'er thy will, Patroclus shall obey."

"O first of friends! (Pelides thus replied)
Still at my heart, and ever at my side!
The time is come, when yon despairing host
Shall learn the value of the man they lost:
Now at my knees the Greeks shall pour their moan,
And proud Atrides tremble on his throne.
Go now to Nestor, and from him be taught
What wounded warrior late his chariot brought:
For, seen at distance, and but seen behind,
His form recall'd Machaon to my mind;
Nor could I, through yon cloud, discern his face,
The coursers pass'd me with so swift a pace."

The hero said. His friend obey'd with haste,
Through intermingled ships and tents he pass'd;
The chiefs descending from their car he found:
The panting steeds Eurymedon unbound.
The warriors standing on the breezy shore,
To dry their sweat, and wash away the gore,
Here paused a moment, while the gentle gale
Convey'd that freshness the cool seas exhale;
Then to consult on farther methods went,
And took their seats beneath the shady tent.
The draught prescribed, fair Hecamede prepares,
Arsinous' daughter, graced with golden hairs:
(Whom to his aged arms, a royal slave,
Greece, as the prize of Nestor's wisdom gave:)
A table first with azure feet she placed;
Whose ample orb a brazen charger graced;
Honey new-press'd, the sacred flour of wheat,
And wholesome garlic, crown'd the savoury treat,
Next her white hand an antique goblet brings,
A goblet sacred to the Pylian kings
From eldest times: emboss'd with studs of gold,
Two feet support it, and four handles hold;
On each bright handle, bending o'er the brink,
In sculptured gold, two turtles seem to drink:
A massy weight, yet heaved with ease by him,
When the brisk nectar overlook'd the brim.
Temper'd in this, the nymph of form divine
Pours a large portion of the Pramnian wine;
With goat's-milk cheese a flavourous taste bestows,
And last with flour the smiling surface strows:
This for the wounded prince the dame prepares:
The cordial beverage reverend Nestor shares:
Salubrious draughts the warriors' thirst allay,
And pleasing conference beguiles the day.

Meantime Patroclus, by Achilles sent,
Unheard approached, and stood before the tent.
Old Nestor, rising then, the hero led
To his high seat: the chief refused and said:

"'Tis now no season for these kind delays;
The great Achilles with impatience stays.
To great Achilles this respect I owe;
Who asks, what hero, wounded by the foe,
Was borne from combat by thy foaming steeds?
With grief I see the great Machaon bleeds.
This to report, my hasty course I bend;
Thou know'st the fiery temper of my friend."
"Can then the sons of Greece (the sage rejoin'd)
Excite compassion in Achilles' mind?
Seeks he the sorrows of our host to know?
This is not half the story of our woe.
Tell him, not great Machaon bleeds alone,
Our bravest heroes in the navy groan,
Ulysses, Agamemnon, Diomed,
And stern Eurypylus, already bleed.
But, ah! what flattering hopes I entertain!
Achilles heeds not, but derides our pain:
Even till the flames consume our fleet he stays,
And waits the rising of the fatal blaze.
Chief after chief the raging foe destroys;
Calm he looks on, and every death enjoys.
Now the slow course of all-impairing time
Unstrings my nerves, and ends my manly prime;
Oh! had I still that strength my youth possess'd,
When this bold arm the Epeian powers oppress'd,
The bulls of Elis in glad triumph led,
And stretch'd the great Itymonaeus dead!
Then from my fury fled the trembling swains,
And ours was all the plunder of the plains:
Fifty white flocks, full fifty herds of swine,
As many goats, as many lowing kine:
And thrice the number of unrivall'd steeds,
All teeming females, and of generous breeds.
These, as my first essay of arms, I won;
Old Neleus gloried in his conquering son.
Thus Elis forced, her long arrears restored,
And shares were parted to each Pylian lord.
The state of Pyle was sunk to last despair,
When the proud Elians first commenced the war:
For Neleus' sons Alcides' rage had slain;
Of twelve bold brothers, I alone remain!
Oppress'd, we arm'd; and now this conquest gain'd,
My sire three hundred chosen sheep obtain'd.
(That large reprisal he might justly claim,
For prize defrauded, and insulted fame,
When Elis' monarch, at the public course,
Detain'd his chariot, and victorious horse.)
The rest the people shared; myself survey'd
The just partition, and due victims paid.
Three days were past, when Elis rose to war,
With many a courser, and with many a car;
The sons of Actor at their army's head
(Young as they were) the vengeful squadrons led.
High on the rock fair Thryoessa stands,
Our utmost frontier on the Pylian lands:
Not far the streams of famed Alphaeus flow:
The stream they pass'd, and pitch'd their tents below.
Pallas, descending in the shades of night,
Alarms the Pylians and commands the fight.
Each burns for fame, and swells with martial pride,
Myself the foremost; but my sire denied;
Fear'd for my youth, exposed to stern alarms;
And stopp'd my chariot, and detain'd my arms.
My sire denied in vain: on foot I fled
Amidst our chariots; for the goddess led.

"Along fair Arene's delightful plain
Soft Minyas rolls his waters to the main:
There, horse and foot, the Pylian troops unite,
And sheathed in arms, expect the dawning light.
Thence, ere the sun advanced his noon-day flame,
To great Alphaeus' sacred source we came.
There first to Jove our solemn rites were paid;
An untamed heifer pleased the blue-eyed maid;
A bull, Alphaeus; and a bull was slain
To the blue monarch of the watery main.
In arms we slept, beside the winding flood,
While round the town the fierce Epeians stood.
Soon as the sun, with all-revealing ray,
Flamed in the front of Heaven, and gave the day.
Bright scenes of arms, and works of war appear;
The nations meet; there Pylos, Elis here.
The first who fell, beneath my javelin bled;
King Augias' son, and spouse of Agamede:
(She that all simples' healing virtues knew,
And every herb that drinks the morning dew:)
I seized his car, the van of battle led;
The Epeians saw, they trembled, and they fled.
The foe dispersed, their bravest warrior kill'd,
Fierce as the whirlwind now I swept the field:
Full fifty captive chariots graced my train;
Two chiefs from each fell breathless to the plain.
Then Actor's sons had died, but Neptune shrouds
The youthful heroes in a veil of clouds.
O'er heapy shields, and o'er the prostrate throng,
Collecting spoils, and slaughtering all along,
Through wide Buprasian fields we forced the foes,
Where o'er the vales the Olenian rocks arose;
Till Pallas stopp'd us where Alisium flows.
Even there the hindmost of the rear I slay,
And the same arm that led concludes the day;
Then back to Pyle triumphant take my way.
There to high Jove were public thanks assign'd,
As first of gods; to Nestor, of mankind.
Such then I was, impell'd by youthful blood;
So proved my valour for my country's good.

"Achilles with unactive fury glows,
And gives to passion what to Greece he owes.
How shall he grieve, when to the eternal shade
Her hosts shall sink, nor his the power to aid!
0 friend! my memory recalls the day,
When, gathering aids along the Grecian sea,
I, and Ulysses, touch'd at Phthia's port,
And entered Peleus' hospitable court.
A bull to Jove he slew in sacrifice,
And pour'd libations on the flaming thighs.
Thyself, Achilles, and thy reverend sire
Menoetius, turn'd the fragments on the fire.
Achilles sees us, to the feast invites;
Social we sit, and share the genial rites.
We then explained the cause on which we came,
Urged you to arms, and found you fierce for fame.
Your ancient fathers generous precepts gave;
Peleus said only this:--'My son! be brave.'
Menoetius thus: 'Though great Achilles shine
In strength superior, and of race divine,
Yet cooler thoughts thy elder years attend;
Let thy just counsels aid, and rule thy friend.'
Thus spoke your father at Thessalia's court:
Words now forgot, though now of vast import.
Ah! try the utmost that a friend can say:
Such gentle force the fiercest minds obey;
Some favouring god Achilles' heart may move;
Though deaf to glory, he may yield to love.
If some dire oracle his breast alarm,
If aught from Heaven withhold his saving arm,
Some beam of comfort yet on Greece may shine,
If thou but lead the Myrmidonian line;
Clad in Achilles' arms, if thou appear,
Proud Troy may tremble, and desist from war;
Press'd by fresh forces, her o'er-labour'd train
Shall seek their walls, and Greece respire again."

This touch'd his generous heart, and from the tent
Along the shore with hasty strides he went;
Soon as he came, where, on the crowded strand,
The public mart and courts of justice stand,
Where the tall fleet of great Ulysses lies,
And altars to the guardian gods arise;
There, sad, he met the brave Euaemon's son,
Large painful drops from all his members run;
An arrow's head yet rooted in his wound,
The sable blood in circles mark'd the ground.
As faintly reeling he confess'd the smart,
Weak was his pace, but dauntless was his heart.
Divine compassion touch'd Patroclus' breast,
Who, sighing, thus his bleeding friend address'd:

"Ah, hapless leaders of the Grecian host!
Thus must ye perish on a barbarous coast?
Is this your fate, to glut the dogs with gore,
Far from your friends, and from your native shore?
Say, great Eurypylus! shall Greece yet stand?
Resists she yet the raging Hector's hand?
Or are her heroes doom'd to die with shame,
And this the period of our wars and fame?"

Eurypylus replies: "No more, my friend;
Greece is no more! this day her glories end;
Even to the ships victorious Troy pursues,
Her force increasing as her toil renews.
Those chiefs, that used her utmost rage to meet,
Lie pierced with wounds, and bleeding in the fleet.
But, thou, Patroclus! act a friendly part,
Lead to my ships, and draw this deadly dart;
With lukewarm water wash the gore away;
With healing balms the raging smart allay,
Such as sage Chiron, sire of pharmacy,
Once taught Achilles, and Achilles thee.
Of two famed surgeons, Podalirius stands
This hour surrounded by the Trojan bands;
And great Machaon, wounded in his tent,
Now wants that succour which so oft he lent."

To him the chief: "What then remains to do?
The event of things the gods alone can view.
Charged by Achilles' great command I fly,
And bear with haste the Pylian king's reply:
But thy distress this instant claims relief."
He said, and in his arms upheld the chief.
The slaves their master's slow approach survey'd,
And hides of oxen on the floor display'd:
There stretch'd at length the wounded hero lay;
Patroclus cut the forky steel away:
Then in his hands a bitter root he bruised;
The wound he wash'd, the styptic juice infused.
The closing flesh that instant ceased to glow,
The wound to torture, and the blood to flow.

While thus the hero's pious cares attend
The cure and safety of his wounded friend,
Trojans and Greeks with clashing shields engage,
And mutual deaths are dealt with mutual rage.
Nor long the trench or lofty walls oppose;
With gods averse the ill-fated works arose;
Their powers neglected, and no victim slain,
The walls were raised, the trenches sunk in vain.

Without the gods, how short a period stands
The proudest monument of mortal hands!
This stood while Hector and Achilles raged.
While sacred Troy the warring hosts engaged;
But when her sons were slain, her city burn'd,
And what survived of Greece to Greece return'd;
Then Neptune and Apollo shook the shore,
Then Ida's summits pour'd their watery store;
Rhesus and Rhodius then unite their rills,
Caresus roaring down the stony hills,
sepus, Granicus, with mingled force,
And Xanthus foaming from his fruitful source;
And gulfy Simois, rolling to the main
Helmets, and shields, and godlike heroes slain:
These, turn'd by Phoebus from their wonted ways,
Deluged the rampire nine continual days;
The weight of waters saps the yielding wall,
And to the sea the floating bulwarks fall.
Incessant cataracts the Thunderer pours,
And half the skies descend in sluicy showers.
The god of ocean, marching stern before,
With his huge trident wounds the trembling shore,
Vast stones and piles from their foundation heaves,
And whelms the smoky ruin in the waves.
Now smooth'd with sand, and levell'd by the flood,
No fragment tells where once the wonder stood;
In their old bounds the rivers roll again,
Shine 'twixt the hills, or wander o'er the plain.

But this the gods in later times perform;
As yet the bulwark stood, and braved the storm;
The strokes yet echoed of contending powers;
War thunder'd at the gates, and blood distain'd the towers.
Smote by the arm of Jove with dire dismay,
Close by their hollow ships the Grecians lay:
Hector's approach in every wind they hear,
And Hector's fury every moment fear.
He, like a whirlwind, toss'd the scattering throng,
Mingled the troops, and drove the field along.
So 'midst the dogs and hunters' daring bands,
Fierce of his might, a boar or lion stands;
Arm'd foes around a dreadful circle form,
And hissing javelins rain an iron storm:
His powers untamed, their bold assault defy,
And where he turns the rout disperse or die:
He foams, he glares, he bounds against them all,
And if he falls, his courage makes him fall.
With equal rage encompass'd Hector glows;
Exhorts his armies, and the trenches shows.
The panting steeds impatient fury breathe,
And snort and tremble at the gulf beneath;
Just at the brink they neigh, and paw the ground,
And the turf trembles, and the skies resound.
Eager they view'd the prospect dark and deep,
Vast was the leap, and headlong hung the steep;
The bottom bare, (a formidable show!)
And bristled thick with sharpen'd stakes below.
The foot alone this strong defence could force,
And try the pass impervious to the horse.
This saw Polydamas; who, wisely brave,
Restrain'd great Hector, and this counsel gave:

"O thou, bold leader of the Trojan bands!
And you, confederate chiefs from foreign lands!
What entrance here can cumbrous chariots find,
The stakes beneath, the Grecian walls behind?
No pass through those, without a thousand wounds,
No space for combat in yon narrow bounds.
Proud of the favours mighty Jove has shown,
On certain dangers we too rashly run:
If 'tis will our haughty foes to tame,
Oh may this instant end the Grecian name!
Here, far from Argos, let their heroes fall,
And one great day destroy and bury all!
But should they turn, and here oppress our train,
What hopes, what methods of retreat remain?
Wedged in the trench, by our own troops confused,
In one promiscuous carnage crush'd and bruised,
All Troy must perish, if their arms prevail,
Nor shall a Trojan live to tell the tale.
Hear then, ye warriors! and obey with speed;
Back from the trenches let your steeds be led;
Then all alighting, wedged in firm array,
Proceed on foot, and Hector lead the way.
So Greece shall stoop before our conquering power,
And this (if Jove consent) her fatal hour."

This counsel pleased: the godlike Hector sprung
Swift from his seat; his clanging armour rung.
The chief's example follow'd by his train,
Each quits his car, and issues on the plain,
By orders strict the charioteers enjoin'd
Compel the coursers to their ranks behind.
The forces part in five distinguish'd bands,
And all obey their several chiefs' commands.
The best and bravest in the first conspire,
Pant for the fight, and threat the fleet with fire:
Great Hector glorious in the van of these,
Polydamas, and brave Cebriones.
Before the next the graceful Paris shines,
And bold Alcathous, and Agenor joins.
The sons of Priam with the third appear,
Deiphobus, and Helenas the seer;
In arms with these the mighty Asius stood,
Who drew from Hyrtacus his noble blood,
And whom Arisba's yellow coursers bore,
The coursers fed on Selle's winding shore.
Antenor's sons the fourth battalion guide,
And great neas, born on fountful Ide.
Divine Sarpedon the last band obey'd,
Whom Glaucus and Asteropaeus aid.
Next him, the bravest, at their army's head,
But he more brave than all the hosts he led.

Now with compacted shields in close array,
The moving legions speed their headlong way:
Already in their hopes they fire the fleet,
And see the Grecians gasping at their feet.

While every Trojan thus, and every aid,
The advice of wise Polydamas obey'd,
Asius alone, confiding in his car,
His vaunted coursers urged to meet the war.
Unhappy hero! and advised in vain;
Those wheels returning ne'er shall mark the plain;
No more those coursers with triumphant joy
Restore their master to the gates of Troy!
Black death attends behind the Grecian wall,
And great Idomeneus shall boast thy fall!
Fierce to the left he drives, where from the plain
The flying Grecians strove their ships to gain;
Swift through the wall their horse and chariots pass'd,
The gates half-open'd to receive the last.
Thither, exulting in his force, he flies:
His following host with clamours rend the skies:
To plunge the Grecians headlong in the main,
Such their proud hopes; but all their hopes were vain!

To guard the gates, two mighty chiefs attend,
Who from the Lapiths' warlike race descend;
This Polypoetes, great Perithous' heir,
And that Leonteus, like the god of war.
As two tall oaks, before the wall they rise;
Their roots in earth, their heads amidst the skies:
Whose spreading arms with leafy honours crown'd,
Forbid the tempest, and protect the ground;
High on the hills appears their stately form,
And their deep roots for ever brave the storm.
So graceful these, and so the shock they stand
Of raging Asius, and his furious band.
Orestes, Acamas, in front appear,
And Oenomaus and Thoon close the rear:
In vain their clamours shake the ambient fields,
In vain around them beat their hollow shields;
The fearless brothers on the Grecians call,
To guard their navies, and defend the wall.
Even when they saw Troy's sable troops impend,
And Greece tumultuous from her towers descend,
Forth from the portals rush'd the intrepid pair,
Opposed their breasts, and stood themselves the war.
So two wild boars spring furious from their den,
Roused with the cries of dogs and voice of men;
On every side the crackling trees they tear,
And root the shrubs, and lay the forest bare;
They gnash their tusks, with fire their eye-balls roll,
Till some wide wound lets out their mighty soul.
Around their heads the whistling javelins sung,
With sounding strokes their brazen targets rung;
Fierce was the fight, while yet the Grecian powers
Maintain'd the walls, and mann'd the lofty towers:
To save their fleet their last efforts they try,
And stones and darts in mingled tempests fly.

As when sharp Boreas blows abroad, and brings
The dreary winter on his frozen wings;
Beneath the low-hung clouds the sheets of snow
Descend, and whiten all the fields below:
So fast the darts on either army pour,
So down the rampires rolls the rocky shower:
Heavy, and thick, resound the batter'd shields,
And the deaf echo rattles round the fields.

With shame repulsed, with grief and fury driven,
The frantic Asius thus accuses Heaven:
"In powers immortal who shall now believe?
Can those too flatter, and can Jove deceive?
What man could doubt but Troy's victorious power
Should humble Greece, and this her fatal hour?
But like when wasps from hollow crannies drive,
To guard the entrance of their common hive,
Darkening the rock, while with unwearied wings
They strike the assailants, and infix their stings;
A race determined, that to death contend:
So fierce these Greeks their last retreats defend.
Gods! shall two warriors only guard their gates,
Repel an army, and defraud the fates?"

These empty accents mingled with the wind,
Nor moved great Jove's unalterable mind;
To godlike Hector and his matchless might
Was owed the glory of the destined fight.
Like deeds of arms through all the forts were tried,
And all the gates sustain'd an equal tide;
Through the long walls the stony showers were heard,
The blaze of flames, the flash of arms appear'd.
The spirit of a god my breast inspire,
To raise each act to life, and sing with fire!
While Greece unconquer'd kept alive the war,
Secure of death, confiding in despair;
And all her guardian gods, in deep dismay,
With unassisting arms deplored the day.

Even yet the dauntless Lapithae maintain
The dreadful pass, and round them heap the slain.
First Damasus, by Polypoetes' steel,
Pierced through his helmet's brazen visor, fell;
The weapon drank the mingled brains and gore!
The warrior sinks, tremendous now no more!
Next Ormenus and Pylon yield their breath:
Nor less Leonteus strews the field with death;
First through the belt Hippomachus he gored,
Then sudden waved his unresisted sword:
Antiphates, as through the ranks he broke,
The falchion struck, and fate pursued the stroke:
Iamenus, Orestes, Menon, bled;
And round him rose a monument of dead.
Meantime, the bravest of the Trojan crew,
Bold Hector and Polydamas, pursue;
Fierce with impatience on the works to fall,
And wrap in rolling flames the fleet and wall.
These on the farther bank now stood and gazed,
By Heaven alarm'd, by prodigies amazed:
A signal omen stopp'd the passing host,
Their martial fury in their wonder lost.
Jove's bird on sounding pinions beat the skies;
A bleeding serpent of enormous size,
His talons truss'd; alive, and curling round,
He stung the bird, whose throat received the wound:
Mad with the smart, he drops the fatal prey,
In airy circles wings his painful way,
Floats on the winds, and rends the heaven with cries:
Amidst the host the fallen serpent lies.
They, pale with terror, mark its spires unroll'd,
And Jove's portent with beating hearts behold.
Then first Polydamas the silence broke,
Long weigh'd the signal, and to Hector spoke:

"How oft, my brother, thy reproach I bear,
For words well meant, and sentiments sincere?
True to those counsels which I judge the best,
I tell the faithful dictates of my breast.
To speak his thoughts is every freeman's right,
In peace, in war, in council, and in fight;
And all I move, deferring to thy sway,
But tends to raise that power which I obey.
Then hear my words, nor may my words be vain!
Seek not this day the Grecian ships to gain;
For sure, to warn us, Jove his omen sent,
And thus my mind explains its clear event:
The victor eagle, whose sinister flight
Retards our host, and fills our hearts with fright,
Dismiss'd his conquest in the middle skies,
Allow'd to seize, but not possess the prize;
Thus, though we gird with fires the Grecian fleet,
Though these proud bulwalks tumble at our feet,
Toils unforeseen, and fiercer, are decreed;
More woes shall follow, and more heroes bleed.
So bodes my soul, and bids me thus advise;
For thus a skilful seer would read the skies."

To him then Hector with disdain return'd:
(Fierce as he spoke, his eyes with fury burn'd:)
"Are these the faithful counsels of thy tongue?
Thy will is partial, not thy reason wrong:
Or if the purpose of thy heart thou vent,
Sure heaven resumes the little sense it lent.
What coward counsels would thy madness move
Against the word, the will reveal'd of Jove?
The leading sign, the irrevocable nod,
And happy thunders of the favouring god,
These shall I slight, and guide my wavering mind
By wandering birds that flit with every wind?
Ye vagrants of the sky! your wings extend,
Or where the suns arise, or where descend;
To right, to left, unheeded take your way,
While I the dictates of high heaven obey.
Without a sign his sword the brave man draws,
And asks no omen but his country's cause.
But why should'st thou suspect the war's success?
None fears it more, as none promotes it less:
Though all our chiefs amidst yon ships expire,
Trust thy own cowardice to escape their fire.
Troy and her sons may find a general grave,
But thou canst live, for thou canst be a slave.
Yet should the fears that wary mind suggests
Spread their cold poison through our soldiers' breasts,
My javelin can revenge so base a part,
And free the soul that quivers in thy heart."

Furious he spoke, and, rushing to the wall,
Calls on his host; his host obey the call;
With ardour follow where their leader flies:
Redoubling clamours thunder in the skies.
Jove breathes a whirlwind from the hills of Ide,
And drifts of dust the clouded navy hide;
He fills the Greeks with terror and dismay,
And gives great Hector the predestined day.
Strong in themselves, but stronger in his aid,
Close to the works their rigid siege they laid.
In vain the mounds and massy beams defend,
While these they undermine, and those they rend;
Upheaved the piles that prop the solid wall;
And heaps on heaps the smoky ruins fall.
Greece on her ramparts stands the fierce alarms;
The crowded bulwarks blaze with waving arms,
Shield touching shield, a long refulgent row;
Whence hissing darts, incessant, rain below.
The bold Ajaces fly from tower to tower,
And rouse, with flame divine, the Grecian power.
The generous impulse every Greek obeys;
Threats urge the fearful; and the valiant, praise.

"Fellows in arms! whose deeds are known to fame,
And you, whose ardour hopes an equal name!
Since not alike endued with force or art;
Behold a day when each may act his part!
A day to fire the brave, and warm the cold,
To gain new glories, or augment the old.
Urge those who stand, and those who faint, excite;
Drown Hector's vaunts in loud exhorts of fight;
Conquest, not safety, fill the thoughts of all;
Seek not your fleet, but sally from the wall;
So Jove once more may drive their routed train,
And Troy lie trembling in her walls again."

Their ardour kindles all the Grecian powers;
And now the stones descend in heavier showers.
As when high Jove his sharp artillery forms,
And opes his cloudy magazine of storms;
In winter's bleak un comfortable reign,
A snowy inundation hides the plain;
He stills the winds, and bids the skies to sleep;
Then pours the silent tempest thick and deep;
And first the mountain-tops are cover'd o'er,
Then the green fields, and then the sandy shore;
Bent with the weight, the nodding woods are seen,
And one bright waste hides all the works of men:
The circling seas, alone absorbing all,
Drink the dissolving fleeces as they fall:
So from each side increased the stony rain,
And the white ruin rises o'er the plain.

Thus godlike Hector and his troops contend
To force the ramparts, and the gates to rend:
Nor Troy could conquer, nor the Greeks would yield,
Till great Sarpedon tower'd amid the field;
For mighty Jove inspired with martial flame
His matchless son, and urged him on to fame.
In arms he shines, conspicuous from afar,
And bears aloft his ample shield in air;
Within whose orb the thick bull-hides were roll'd,
Ponderous with brass, and bound with ductile gold:
And while two pointed javelins arm his hands,
Majestic moves along, and leads his Lycian bands.

So press'd with hunger, from the mountain's brow
Descends a lion on the flocks below;
So stalks the lordly savage o'er the plain,
In sullen majesty, and stern disdain:
In vain loud mastiffs bay him from afar,
And shepherds gall him with an iron war;
Regardless, furious, he pursues his way;
He foams, he roars, he rends the panting prey.

Resolved alike, divine Sarpedon glows
With generous rage that drives him on the foes.
He views the towers, and meditates their fall,
To sure destruction dooms the aspiring wall;
Then casting on his friend an ardent look,
Fired with the thirst of glory, thus he spoke:

"Why boast we, Glaucus! our extended reign,
Where Xanthus' streams enrich the Lycian plain,
Our numerous herds that range the fruitful field,
And hills where vines their purple harvest yield,
Our foaming bowls with purer nectar crown'd,
Our feasts enhanced with music's sprightly sound?
Why on those shores are we with joy survey'd,
Admired as heroes, and as gods obey'd,
Unless great acts superior merit prove,
And vindicate the bounteous powers above?
'Tis ours, the dignity they give to grace;
The first in valour, as the first in place;
That when with wondering eyes our martial bands
Behold our deeds transcending our commands,
Such, they may cry, deserve the sovereign state,
Whom those that envy dare not imitate!
Could all our care elude the gloomy grave,
Which claims no less the fearful and the brave,
For lust of fame I should not vainly dare
In fighting fields, nor urge thy soul to war.
But since, alas! ignoble age must come,
Disease, and death's inexorable doom
The life, which others pay, let us bestow,
And give to fame what we to nature owe;
Brave though we fall, and honour'd if we live,
Or let us glory gain, or glory give!"

He said; his words the listening chief inspire
With equal warmth, and rouse the warrior's fire;
The troops pursue their leaders with delight,
Rush to the foe, and claim the promised fight.
Menestheus from on high the storm beheld
Threatening the fort, and blackening in the field:
Around the walls he gazed, to view from far
What aid appear'd to avert the approaching war,
And saw where Teucer with the Ajaces stood,
Of fight insatiate, prodigal of blood.
In vain he calls; the din of helms and shields
Rings to the skies, and echoes through the fields,
The brazen hinges fly, the walls resound,
Heaven trembles, roar the mountains, thunders all the ground
Then thus to Thoos: "Hence with speed (he said),
And urge the bold Ajaces to our aid;
Their strength, united, best may help to bear
The bloody labours of the doubtful war:
Hither the Lycian princes bend their course,
The best and bravest of the hostile force.
But if too fiercely there the foes contend,
Let Telamon, at least, our towers defend,
And Teucer haste with his unerring bow
To share the danger, and repel the foe."

Swift, at the word, the herald speeds along
The lofty ramparts, through the martial throng,
And finds the heroes bathed in sweat and gore,
Opposed in combat on the dusty shore.
"Ye valiant leaders of our warlike bands!
Your aid (said Thoos) Peteus' son demands;
Your strength, united, best may help to bear
The bloody labours of the doubtful war:
Thither the Lycian princes bend their course,
The best and bravest of the hostile force.
But if too fiercely, here, the foes contend,
At least, let Telamon those towers defend,
And Teucer haste with his unerring bow
To share the danger, and repel the foe."

Straight to the fort great Ajax turn'd his care,
And thus bespoke his brothers of the war:
"Now, valiant Lycomede! exert your might,
And, brave Oileus, prove your force in fight;
To you I trust the fortune of the field,
Till by this arm the foe shall be repell'd:
That done, expect me to complete the day
Then with his sevenfold shield he strode away.
With equal steps bold Teucer press'd the shore,
Whose fatal bow the strong Pandion bore.

High on the walls appear'd the Lycian powers,
Like some black tempest gathering round the towers:
The Greeks, oppress'd, their utmost force unite,
Prepared to labour in the unequal fight:
The war renews, mix'd shouts and groans arise;
Tumultuous clamour mounts, and thickens in the skies.
Fierce Ajax first the advancing host invades,
And sends the brave Epicles to the shades,
Sarpedon's friend. Across the warrior's way,
Rent from the walls, a rocky fragment lay;
In modern ages not the strongest swain
Could heave the unwieldy burden from the plain:
He poised, and swung it round; then toss'd on high,
It flew with force, and labour'd up the sky;
Full on the Lycian's helmet thundering down,
The ponderous ruin crush'd his batter'd crown.
As skilful divers from some airy steep
Headlong descend, and shoot into the deep,
So falls Epicles; then in groans expires,
And murmuring to the shades the soul retires.

While to the ramparts daring Glaucus drew,
From Teucer's hand a winged arrow flew;
The bearded shaft the destined passage found,
And on his naked arm inflicts a wound.
The chief, who fear'd some foe's insulting boast
Might stop the progress of his warlike host,
Conceal'd the wound, and, leaping from his height
Retired reluctant from the unfinish'd fight.
Divine Sarpedon with regret beheld
Disabled Glaucus slowly quit the field;
His beating breast with generous ardour glows,
He springs to fight, and flies upon the foes.
Alcmaon first was doom'd his force to feel;
Deep in his breast he plunged the pointed steel;
Then from the yawning wound with fury tore
The spear, pursued by gushing streams of gore:
Down sinks the warrior with a thundering sound,
His brazen armour rings against the ground.

Swift to the battlement the victor flies,
Tugs with full force, and every nerve applies:
It shakes; the ponderous stones disjointed yield;
The rolling ruins smoke along the field.
A mighty breach appears; the walls lie bare;
And, like a deluge, rushes in the war.
At once bold Teucer draws the twanging bow,
And Ajax sends his javelin at the foe;
Fix'd in his belt the feather'd weapon stood,
And through his buckler drove the trembling wood;
But Jove was present in the dire debate,
To shield his offspring, and avert his fate.
The prince gave back, not meditating flight,
But urging vengeance, and severer fight;
Then raised with hope, and fired with glory's charms,
His fainting squadrons to new fury warms.
"O where, ye Lycians, is the strength you boast?
Your former fame and ancient virtue lost!
The breach lies open, but your chief in vain
Attempts alone the guarded pass to gain:
Unite, and soon that hostile fleet shall fall:
The force of powerful union conquers all."

This just rebuke inflamed the Lycian crew;
They join, they thicken, and the assault renew:
Unmoved the embodied Greeks their fury dare,
And fix'd support the weight of all the war;
Nor could the Greeks repel the Lycian powers,
Nor the bold Lycians force the Grecian towers.
As on the confines of adjoining grounds,
Two stubborn swains with blows dispute their bounds;
They tug, they sweat; but neither gain, nor yield,
One foot, one inch, of the contended field;
Thus obstinate to death, they fight, they fall;
Nor these can keep, nor those can win the wall.
Their manly breasts are pierced with many a wound,
Loud strokes are heard, and rattling arms resound;
The copious slaughter covers all the shore,
And the high ramparts drip with human gore.

As when two scales are charged with doubtful loads,
From side to side the trembling balance nods,
(While some laborious matron, just and poor,
With nice exactness weighs her woolly store,)
Till poised aloft, the resting beam suspends
Each equal weight; nor this, nor that, descends:
So stood the war, till Hector's matchless might,
With fates prevailing, turn'd the scale of fight.
Fierce as a whirlwind up the walls he flies,
And fires his host with loud repeated cries.
"Advance, ye Trojans! lend your valiant hands,
Haste to the fleet, and toss the blazing brands!"
They hear, they run; and, gathering at his call,
Raise scaling engines, and ascend the wall:
Around the works a wood of glittering spears
Shoots up, and all the rising host appears.
A ponderous stone bold Hector heaved to throw,
Pointed above, and rough and gross below:
Not two strong men the enormous weight could raise,
Such men as live in these degenerate days:
Yet this, as easy as a swain could bear
The snowy fleece, he toss'd, and shook in air;
For Jove upheld, and lighten'd of its load
The unwieldy rock, the labour of a god.
Thus arm'd, before the folded gates he came,
Of massy substance, and stupendous frame;
With iron bars and brazen hinges strong,
On lofty beams of solid timber hung:
Then thundering through the planks with forceful sway,
Drives the sharp rock; the solid beams give way,
The folds are shatter'd; from the crackling door
Leap the resounding bars, the flying hinges roar.
Now rushing in, the furious chief appears,
Gloomy as night! and shakes two shining spears:
A dreadful gleam from his bright armour came,
And from his eye-balls flash'd the living flame.
He moves a god, resistless in his course,
And seems a match for more than mortal force.
Then pouring after, through the gaping space,
A tide of Trojans flows, and fills the place;
The Greeks behold, they tremble, and they fly;
The shore is heap'd with death, and tumult rends the sky.

When now the Thunderer on the sea-beat coast
Had fix'd great Hector and his conquering host,
He left them to the fates, in bloody fray
To toil and struggle through the well-fought day.
Then turn'd to Thracia from the field of fight
Those eyes that shed insufferable light,
To where the Mysians prove their martial force,
And hardy Thracians tame the savage horse;
And where the far-famed Hippomolgian strays,
Renown'd for justice and for length of days;
Thrice happy race! that, innocent of blood,
From milk, innoxious, seek their simple food:
Jove sees delighted; and avoids the scene
Of guilty Troy, of arms, and dying men:
No aid, he deems, to either host is given,
While his high law suspends the powers of Heaven.

Meantime the monarch of the watery main
Observed the Thunderer, nor observed in vain.
In Samothracia, on a mountain's brow,
Whose waving woods o'erhung the deeps below,
He sat; and round him cast his azure eyes
Where Ida's misty tops confusedly rise;
Below, fair Ilion's glittering spires were seen;
The crowded ships and sable seas between.
There, from the crystal chambers of the main
Emerged, he sat, and mourn'd his Argives slain.
At Jove incensed, with grief and fury stung,
Prone down the rocky steep he rush'd along;
Fierce as he pass'd, the lofty mountains nod,
The forest shakes; earth trembled as he trod,
And felt the footsteps of the immortal god.
From realm to realm three ample strides he took,
And, at the fourth, the distant gae shook.

Far in the bay his shining palace stands,
Eternal frame! not raised by mortal hands:
This having reach'd, his brass-hoof'd steeds he reins,
Fleet as the winds, and deck'd with golden manes.
Refulgent arms his mighty limbs infold,
Immortal arms of adamant and gold.
He mounts the car, the golden scourge applies,
He sits superior, and the chariot flies:
His whirling wheels the glassy surface sweep;
The enormous monsters rolling o'er the deep
Gambol around him on the watery way,
And heavy whales in awkward measures play;
The sea subsiding spreads a level plain,
Exults, and owns the monarch of the main;
The parting waves before his coursers fly;
The wondering waters leave his axle dry.

Deep in the liquid regions lies a cave,
Between where Tenedos the surges lave,
And rocky Imbrus breaks the rolling wave:
There the great ruler of the azure round
Stopp'd his swift chariot, and his steeds unbound,
Fed with ambrosial herbage from his hand,
And link'd their fetlocks with a golden band,
Infrangible, immortal: there they stay:
The father of the floods pursues his way:
Where, like a tempest, darkening heaven around,
Or fiery deluge that devours the ground,
The impatient Trojans, in a gloomy throng,
Embattled roll'd, as Hector rush'd along:
To the loud tumult and the barbarous cry
The heavens re-echo, and the shores reply:
They vow destruction to the Grecian name,
And in their hopes the fleets already flame.

But Neptune, rising from the seas profound,
The god whose earthquakes rock the solid ground,
Now wears a mortal form; like Calchas seen,
Such his loud voice, and such his manly mien;
His shouts incessant every Greek inspire,
But most the Ajaces, adding fire to fire.

"'Tis yours, O warriors, all our hopes to raise:
Oh recollect your ancient worth and praise!
'Tis yours to save us, if you cease to fear;
Flight, more than shameful, is destructive here.
On other works though Troy with fury fall,
And pour her armies o'er our batter'd wall:
There Greece has strength: but this, this part o'erthrown,
Her strength were vain; I dread for you alone:
Here Hector rages like the force of fire,
Vaunts of his gods, and calls high Jove his sire:
If yet some heavenly power your breast excite,
Breathe in your hearts, and string your arms to fight,
Greece yet may live, her threaten'd fleet maintain:
And Hector's force, and Jove's own aid, be vain."

Then with his sceptre, that the deep controls,
He touch'd the chiefs, and steel'd their manly souls:
Strength, not their own, the touch divine imparts,
Prompts their light limbs, and swells their daring hearts.
Then, as a falcon from the rocky height,
Her quarry seen, impetuous at the sight,
Forth-springing instant, darts herself from high,
Shoots on the wing, and skims along the sky:
Such, and so swift, the power of ocean flew;
The wide horizon shut him from their view.

The inspiring god Oileus' active son
Perceived the first, and thus to Telamon:

"Some god, my friend, some god in human form
Favouring descends, and wills to stand the storm.
Not Calchas this, the venerable seer;
Short as he turned, I saw the power appear:
I mark'd his parting, and the steps he trod;
His own bright evidence reveals a god.
Even now some energy divine I share,
And seem to walk on wings, and tread in air!"

"With equal ardour (Telamon returns)
My soul is kindled, and my bosom burns;
New rising spirits all my force alarm,
Lift each impatient limb, and brace my arm.
This ready arm, unthinking, shakes the dart;
The blood pours back, and fortifies my heart:
Singly, methinks, yon towering chief I meet,
And stretch the dreadful Hector at my feet."

Full of the god that urged their burning breast,
The heroes thus their mutual warmth express'd.
Neptune meanwhile the routed Greeks inspired;
Who, breathless, pale, with length of labours tired,
Pant in the ships; while Troy to conquest calls,
And swarms victorious o'er their yielding walls:
Trembling before the impending storm they lie,
While tears of rage stand burning in their eye.
Greece sunk they thought, and this their fatal hour;
But breathe new courage as they feel the power.
Teucer and Leitus first his words excite;
Then stern Peneleus rises to the fight;
Thoas, Deipyrus, in arms renown'd,
And Merion next, the impulsive fury found;
Last Nestor's son the same bold ardour takes,
While thus the god the martial fire awakes:

"Oh lasting infamy, oh dire disgrace
To chiefs of vigorous youth, and manly race!
I trusted in the gods, and you, to see
Brave Greece victorious, and her navy free:
Ah, no--the glorious combat you disclaim,
And one black day clouds all her former fame.
Heavens! what a prodigy these eyes survey,
Unseen, unthought, till this amazing day!
Fly we at length from Troy's oft-conquer'd bands?
And falls our fleet by such inglorious hands?
A rout undisciplined, a straggling train,
Not born to glories of the dusty plain;
Like frighted fawns from hill to hill pursued,
A prey to every savage of the wood:
Shall these, so late who trembled at your name,
Invade your camps, involve your ships in flame?
A change so shameful, say, what cause has wrought?
The soldiers' baseness, or the general's fault?
Fools! will ye perish for your leader's vice;
The purchase infamy, and life the price?
'Tis not your cause, Achilles' injured fame:
Another's is the crime, but yours the shame.
Grant that our chief offend through rage or lust,
Must you be cowards, if your king's unjust?
Prevent this evil, and your country save:
Small thought retrieves the spirits of the brave.
Think, and subdue! on dastards dead to fame
I waste no anger, for they feel no shame:
But you, the pride, the flower of all our host,
My heart weeps blood to see your glory lost!
Nor deem this day, this battle, all you lose;
A day more black, a fate more vile, ensues.
Let each reflect, who prizes fame or breath,
On endless infamy, on instant death:
For, lo! the fated time, the appointed shore:
Hark! the gates burst, the brazen barriers roar!
Impetuous Hector thunders at the wall;
The hour, the spot, to conquer, or to fall."

These words the Grecians' fainting hearts inspire,
And listening armies catch the godlike fire.
Fix'd at his post was each bold Ajax found,
With well-ranged squadrons strongly circled round:
So close their order, so disposed their fight,
As Pallas' self might view with fix'd delight;
Or had the god of war inclined his eyes,
The god of war had own'd a just surprise.
A chosen phalanx, firm, resolved as fate,
Descending Hector and his battle wait.
An iron scene gleams dreadful o'er the fields,
Armour in armour lock'd, and shields in shields,
Spears lean on spears, on targets targets throng,
Helms stuck to helms, and man drove man along.
The floating plumes unnumber'd wave above,
As when an earthquake stirs the nodding grove;
And levell'd at the skies with pointing rays,
Their brandish'd lances at each motion blaze.

Thus breathing death, in terrible array,
The close compacted legions urged their way:
Fierce they drove on, impatient to destroy;
Troy charged the first, and Hector first of Troy.
As from some mountain's craggy forehead torn,
A rock's round fragment flies, with fury borne,
(Which from the stubborn stone a torrent rends,)
Precipitate the ponderous mass descends:
From steep to steep the rolling ruin bounds;
At every shock the crackling wood resounds;
Still gathering force, it smokes; and urged amain,
Whirls, leaps, and thunders down, impetuous to the plain:
There stops--so Hector. Their whole force he proved,
Resistless when he raged, and, when he stopp'd, unmoved.

On him the war is bent, the darts are shed,
And all their falchions wave around his head:
Repulsed he stands, nor from his stand retires;
But with repeated shouts his army fires.
"Trojans! be firm; this arm shall make your way
Through yon square body, and that black array:
Stand, and my spear shall rout their scattering power,
Strong as they seem, embattled like a tower;
For he that Juno's heavenly bosom warms,
The first of gods, this day inspires our arms."

He said; and roused the soul in every breast:
Urged with desire of fame, beyond the rest,
Forth march'd Deiphobus; but, marching, held
Before his wary steps his ample shield.
Bold Merion aim'd a stroke (nor aim'd it wide);
The glittering javelin pierced the tough bull-hide;
But pierced not through: unfaithful to his hand,
The point broke short, and sparkled in the sand.
The Trojan warrior, touch'd with timely fear,
On the raised orb to distance bore the spear.
The Greek, retreating, mourn'd his frustrate blow,
And cursed the treacherous lance that spared a foe;
Then to the ships with surly speed he went,
To seek a surer javelin in his tent.

Meanwhile with rising rage the battle glows,
The tumult thickens, and the clamour grows.
By Teucer's arm the warlike Imbrius bleeds,
The son of Mentor, rich in generous steeds.
Ere yet to Troy the sons of Greece were led,
In fair Pedaeus' verdant pastures bred,
The youth had dwelt, remote from war's alarms,
And blest in bright Medesicaste's arms:
(This nymph, the fruit of Priam's ravish'd joy,
Allied the warrior to the house of Troy:)
To Troy, when glory call'd his arms, he came,
And match'd the bravest of her chiefs in fame:
With Priam's sons, a guardian of the throne,
He lived, beloved and honour'd as his own.
Him Teucer pierced between the throat and ear:
He groans beneath the Telamonian spear.
As from some far-seen mountain's airy crown,
Subdued by steel, a tall ash tumbles down,
And soils its verdant tresses on the ground;
So falls the youth; his arms the fall resound.
Then Teucer rushing to despoil the dead,
From Hector's hand a shining javelin fled:
He saw, and shunn'd the death; the forceful dart
Sung on, and pierced Amphimachus's heart,
Cteatus' son, of Neptune's forceful line;
Vain was his courage, and his race divine!
Prostrate he falls; his clanging arms resound,
And his broad buckler thunders on the ground.
To seize his beamy helm the victor flies,
And just had fastened on the dazzling prize,
When Ajax' manly arm a javelin flung;
Full on the shield's round boss the weapon rung;
He felt the shock, nor more was doom'd to feel,
Secure in mail, and sheath'd in shining steel.
Repulsed he yields; the victor Greeks obtain
The spoils contested, and bear off the slain.
Between the leaders of the Athenian line,
(Stichius the brave, Menestheus the divine,)
Deplored Amphimachus, sad object! lies;
Imbrius remains the fierce Ajaces' prize.
As two grim lions bear across the lawn,
Snatch'd from devouring hounds, a slaughter'd fawn.
In their fell jaws high-lifting through the wood,
And sprinkling all the shrubs with drops of blood;
So these, the chief: great Ajax from the dead
Strips his bright arms; Oileus lops his head:
Toss'd like a ball, and whirl'd in air away,
At Hector's feet the gory visage lay.

The god of ocean, fired with stern disdain,
And pierced with sorrow for his grandson slain,
Inspires the Grecian hearts, confirms their hands,
And breathes destruction on the Trojan bands.
Swift as a whirlwind rushing to the fleet,
He finds the lance-famed Idomen of Crete,
His pensive brow the generous care express'd
With which a wounded soldier touch'd his breast,
Whom in the chance of war a javelin tore,
And his sad comrades from the battle bore;
Him to the surgeons of the camp he sent:
That office paid, he issued from his tent
Fierce for the fight: to whom the god begun,
In Thoas' voice, Andraemon's valiant son,
Who ruled where Calydon's white rocks arise,
And Pleuron's chalky cliffs emblaze the skies:

"Where's now the imperious vaunt, the daring boast,
Of Greece victorious, and proud Ilion lost?"

To whom the king: "On Greece no blame be thrown;
Arms are her trade, and war is all her own.
Her hardy heroes from the well-fought plains
Nor fear withholds, nor shameful sloth detains:
'Tis heaven, alas! and Jove's all-powerful doom,
That far, far distant from our native home
Wills us to fall inglorious! Oh, my friend!
Once foremost in the fight, still prone to lend
Or arms or counsels, now perform thy best,
And what thou canst not singly, urge the rest."

Thus he: and thus the god whose force can make
The solid globe's eternal basis shake:
"Ah! never may he see his native land,
But feed the vultures on this hateful strand,
Who seeks ignobly in his ships to stay,
Nor dares to combat on this signal day!
For this, behold! in horrid arms I shine,
And urge thy soul to rival acts with mine.
Together let us battle on the plain;
Two, not the worst; nor even this succour vain:
Not vain the weakest, if their force unite;
But ours, the bravest have confess'd in fight."

This said, he rushes where the combat burns;
Swift to his tent the Cretan king returns:
From thence, two javelins glittering in his hand,
And clad in arms that lighten'd all the strand,
Fierce on the foe the impetuous hero drove,
Like lightning bursting from the arm of Jove,
Which to pale man the wrath of heaven declares,
Or terrifies the offending world with wars;
In streamy sparkles, kindling all the skies,
From pole to pole the trail of glory flies:
Thus his bright armour o'er the dazzled throng
Gleam'd dreadful, as the monarch flash'd along.

Him, near his tent, Meriones attends;
Whom thus he questions: "Ever best of friends!
O say, in every art of battle skill'd,
What holds thy courage from so brave a field?
On some important message art thou bound,
Or bleeds my friend by some unhappy wound?
Inglorious here, my soul abhors to stay,
And glows with prospects of th' approaching day."

"O prince! (Meriones replies) whose care
Leads forth the embattled sons of Crete to war;
This speaks my grief: this headless lance I wield;
The rest lies rooted in a Trojan shield."

To whom the Cretan: "Enter, and receive
The wonted weapons; those my tent can give;
Spears I have store, (and Trojan lances all,)
That shed a lustre round the illumined wall,
Though I, disdainful of the distant war,
Nor trust the dart, nor aim the uncertain spear,
Yet hand to hand I fight, and spoil the slain;
And thence these trophies, and these arms I gain.
Enter, and see on heaps the helmets roll'd,
And high-hung spears, and shields that flame with gold."

"Nor vain (said Merion) are our martial toils;
We too can boast of no ignoble spoils:
But those my ship contains; whence distant far,
I fight conspicuous in the van of war,
What need I more? If any Greek there be
Who knows not Merion, I appeal to thee."

To this, Idomeneus: "The fields of fight
Have proved thy valour, and unconquer'd might:
And were some ambush for the foes design'd,
Even there thy courage would not lag behind:
In that sharp service, singled from the rest,
The fear of each, or valour, stands confess'd.
No force, no firmness, the pale coward shows;
He shifts his place: his colour comes and goes:
A dropping sweat creeps cold on every part;
Against his bosom beats his quivering heart;
Terror and death in his wild eye-balls stare;
With chattering teeth he stands, and stiffening hair,
And looks a bloodless image of despair!
Not so the brave--still dauntless, still the same,
Unchanged his colour, and unmoved his frame:
Composed his thought, determined is his eye,
And fix'd his soul, to conquer or to die:
If aught disturb the tenour of his breast,
'Tis but the wish to strike before the rest.

"In such assays thy blameless worth is known,
And every art of dangerous war thy own.
By chance of fight whatever wounds you bore,
Those wounds were glorious all, and all before;
Such as may teach, 'twas still thy brave delight
T'oppose thy bosom where thy foremost fight.
But why, like infants, cold to honour's charms,
Stand we to talk, when glory calls to arms?
Go--from my conquer'd spears the choicest take,
And to their owners send them nobly back."

Swift at the word bold Merion snatch'd a spear
And, breathing slaughter, follow'd to the war.
So Mars armipotent invades the plain,
(The wide destroyer of the race of man,)
Terror, his best-beloved son, attends his course,
Arm'd with stern boldness, and enormous force;
The pride of haughty warriors to confound,
And lay the strength of tyrants on the ground:
From Thrace they fly, call'd to the dire alarms
Of warring Phlegyans, and Ephyrian arms;
Invoked by both, relentless they dispose,
To these glad conquest, murderous rout to those.
So march'd the leaders of the Cretan train,
And their bright arms shot horror o'er the plain.

Then first spake Merion: "Shall we join the right,
Or combat in the centre of the fight?
Or to the left our wonted succour lend?
Hazard and fame all parts alike attend."

"Not in the centre (Idomen replied:)
Our ablest chieftains the main battle guide;
Each godlike Ajax makes that post his care,
And gallant Teucer deals destruction there,
Skill'd or with shafts to gall the distant field,
Or bear close battle on the sounding shield.
These can the rage of haughty Hector tame:
Safe in their arms, the navy fears no flame,
Till Jove himself descends, his bolts to shed,
And hurl the blazing ruin at our head.
Great must he be, of more than human birth,
Nor feed like mortals on the fruits of earth.
Him neither rocks can crush, nor steel can wound,
Whom Ajax fells not on the ensanguined ground.
In standing fight he mates Achilles' force,
Excell'd alone in swiftness in the course.
Then to the left our ready arms apply,
And live with glory, or with glory die."

He said: and Merion to th' appointed place,
Fierce as the god of battles, urged his pace.
Soon as the foe the shining chiefs beheld
Rush like a fiery torrent o'er the field,
Their force embodied in a tide they pour;
The rising combat sounds along the shore.
As warring winds, in Sirius' sultry reign,
From different quarters sweep the sandy plain;
On every side the dusty whirlwinds rise,
And the dry fields are lifted to the skies:
Thus by despair, hope, rage, together driven,
Met the black hosts, and, meeting, darken'd heaven.
All dreadful glared the iron face of war,
Bristled with upright spears, that flash'd afar;
Dire was the gleam of breastplates, helms, and shields,
And polish'd arms emblazed the flaming fields:
Tremendous scene! that general horror gave,
But touch'd with joy the bosoms of the brave.

Saturn's great sons in fierce contention vied,
And crowds of heroes in their anger died.
The sire of earth and heaven, by Thetis won
To crown with glory Peleus' godlike son,
Will'd not destruction to the Grecian powers,
But spared awhile the destined Trojan towers;
While Neptune, rising from his azure main,
Warr'd on the king of heaven with stern disdain,
And breathed revenge, and fired the Grecian train.
Gods of one source, of one ethereal race,
Alike divine, and heaven their native place;
But Jove the greater; first-born of the skies,
And more than men, or gods, supremely wise.
For this, of Jove's superior might afraid,
Neptune in human form conceal'd his aid.
These powers enfold the Greek and Trojan train
In war and discord's adamantine chain,
Indissolubly strong: the fatal tie
Is stretch'd on both, and close compell'd they die.

Dreadful in arms, and grown in combats grey,
The bold Idomeneus controls the day.
First by his hand Othryoneus was slain,
Swell'd with false hopes, with mad ambition vain;
Call'd by the voice of war to martial fame,
From high Cabesus' distant walls he came;
Cassandra's love he sought, with boasts of power,
And promised conquest was the proffer'd dower.
The king consented, by his vaunts abused;
The king consented, but the fates refused.
Proud of himself, and of the imagined bride,
The field he measured with a larger stride.
Him as he stalk'd, the Cretan javelin found;
Vain was his breastplate to repel the wound:
His dream of glory lost, he plunged to hell;
His arms resounded as the boaster fell.
The great Idomeneus bestrides the dead;
"And thus (he cries) behold thy promise sped!
Such is the help thy arms to Ilion bring,
And such the contract of the Phrygian king!
Our offers now, illustrious prince! receive;
For such an aid what will not Argos give?
To conquer Troy, with ours thy forces join,
And count Atrides' fairest daughter thine.
Meantime, on further methods to advise,
Come, follow to the fleet thy new allies;
There hear what Greece has on her part to say."
He spoke, and dragg'd the gory corse away.
This Asius view'd, unable to contain,
Before his chariot warring on the plain:
(His crowded coursers, to his squire consign'd,
Impatient panted on his neck behind:)
To vengeance rising with a sudden spring,
He hoped the conquest of the Cretan king.
The wary Cretan, as his foe drew near,
Full on his throat discharged the forceful spear:
Beneath the chin the point was seen to glide,
And glitter'd, extant at the further side.
As when the mountain-oak, or poplar tall,
Or pine, fit mast for some great admiral,
Groans to the oft-heaved axe, with many a wound,
Then spreads a length of ruin o'er the ground:
So sunk proud Asius in that dreadful day,
And stretch'd before his much-loved coursers lay.
He grinds the dust distain'd with streaming gore,
And, fierce in death, lies foaming on the shore.
Deprived of motion, stiff with stupid fear,
Stands all aghast his trembling charioteer,
Nor shuns the foe, nor turns the steeds away,
But falls transfix'd, an unresisting prey:
Pierced by Antilochus, he pants beneath
The stately car, and labours out his breath.
Thus Asius' steeds (their mighty master gone)
Remain the prize of Nestor's youthful son.

Stabb'd at the sight, Deiphobus drew nigh,
And made, with force, the vengeful weapon fly.
The Cretan saw; and, stooping, caused to glance
From his slope shield the disappointed lance.
Beneath the spacious targe, (a blazing round,
Thick with bull-hides and brazen orbits bound,
On his raised arm by two strong braces stay'd,)
He lay collected in defensive shade.
O'er his safe head the javelin idly sung,
And on the tinkling verge more faintly rung.
Even then the spear the vigorous arm confess'd,
And pierced, obliquely, king Hypsenor's breast:
Warm'd in his liver, to the ground it bore
The chief, his people's guardian now no more!

"Not unattended (the proud Trojan cries)
Nor unrevenged, lamented Asius lies:
For thee, through hell's black portals stand display'd,
This mate shall joy thy melancholy shade."

Heart-piercing anguish, at the haughty boast,
Touch'd every Greek, but Nestor's son the most.
Grieved as he was, his pious arms attend,
And his broad buckler shields his slaughter'd friend:
Till sad Mecistheus and Alastor bore
His honour'd body to the tented shore.

Nor yet from fight Idomeneus withdraws;
Resolved to perish in his country's cause,
Or find some foe, whom heaven and he shall doom
To wail his fate in death's eternal gloom.
He sees Alcathous in the front aspire:
Great syetes was the hero's sire;
His spouse Hippodame, divinely fair,
Anchises' eldest hope, and darling care:
Who charm'd her parents' and her husband's heart
With beauty, sense, and every work of art:
He once of Ilion's youth the loveliest boy,
The fairest she of all the fair of Troy.
By Neptune now the hapless hero dies,
Who covers with a cloud those beauteous eyes,
And fetters every limb: yet bent to meet
His fate he stands; nor shuns the lance of Crete.
Fix'd as some column, or deep-rooted oak,
While the winds sleep; his breast received the stroke.
Before the ponderous stroke his corslet yields,
Long used to ward the death in fighting fields.
The riven armour sends a jarring sound;
His labouring heart heaves with so strong a bound,
The long lance shakes, and vibrates in the wound;
Fast flowing from its source, as prone he lay,
Life's purple tide impetuous gush'd away.

Then Idomen, insulting o'er the slain:
"Behold, Deiphobus! nor vaunt in vain:
See! on one Greek three Trojan ghosts attend;
This, my third victim, to the shades I send.
Approaching now thy boasted might approve,
And try the prowess of the seed of Jove.
From Jove, enamour'd of a mortal dame,
Great Minos, guardian of his country, came:
Deucalion, blameless prince, was Minos' heir;
His first-born I, the third from Jupiter:
O'er spacious Crete, and her bold sons, I reign,
And thence my ships transport me through the main:
Lord of a host, o'er all my host I shine,
A scourge to thee, thy father, and thy line."

The Trojan heard; uncertain or to meet,
Alone, with venturous arms the king of Crete,
Or seek auxiliar force; at length decreed
To call some hero to partake the deed,
Forthwith neas rises to his thought:
For him in Troy's remotest lines he sought,
Where he, incensed at partial Priam, stands,
And sees superior posts in meaner hands.
To him, ambitious of so great an aid,
The bold Deiphobus approach'd, and said:

"Now, Trojan prince, employ thy pious arms,
If e'er thy bosom felt fair honour's charms.
Alcathous dies, thy brother and thy friend;
Come, and the warrior's loved remains defend.
Beneath his cares thy early youth was train'd,
One table fed you, and one roof contain'd.
This deed to fierce Idomeneus we owe;
Haste, and revenge it on th' insulting foe."

neas heard, and for a space resign'd
To tender pity all his manly mind;
Then rising in his rage, he burns to fight:
The Greek awaits him with collected might.
As the fell boar, on some rough mountain's head,
Arm'd with wild terrors, and to slaughter bred,
When the loud rustics rise, and shout from far,
Attends the tumult, and expects the war;
O'er his bent back the bristly horrors rise;
Fires stream in lightning from his sanguine eyes,
His foaming tusks both dogs and men engage;
But most his hunters rouse his mighty rage:
So stood Idomeneus, his javelin shook,
And met the Trojan with a lowering look.
Antilochus, Deipyrus, were near,
The youthful offspring of the god of war,
Merion, and Aphareus, in field renown'd:
To these the warrior sent his voice around.
"Fellows in arms! your timely aid unite;
Lo, great neas rushes to the fight:
Sprung from a god, and more than mortal bold;
He fresh in youth, and I in arms grown old.
Else should this hand, this hour decide the strife,
The great dispute, of glory, or of life."

He spoke, and all, as with one soul, obey'd;
Their lifted bucklers cast a dreadful shade
Around the chief. neas too demands
Th' assisting forces of his native bands;
Paris, Deiphobus, Agenor, join;
(Co-aids and captains of the Trojan line;)
In order follow all th' embodied train,
Like Ida's flocks proceeding o'er the plain;
Before his fleecy care, erect and bold,
Stalks the proud ram, the father of the bold.
With joy the swain surveys them, as he leads
To the cool fountains, through the well-known meads:
So joys neas, as his native band
Moves on in rank, and stretches o'er the land.

Round dread Alcathous now the battle rose;
On every side the steely circle grows;
Now batter'd breast-plates and hack'd helmets ring,
And o'er their heads unheeded javelins sing.
Above the rest, two towering chiefs appear,
There great Idomeneus, neas here.
Like gods of war, dispensing fate, they stood,
And burn'd to drench the ground with mutual blood.
The Trojan weapon whizz'd along in air;
The Cretan saw, and shunn'd the brazen spear:
Sent from an arm so strong, the missive wood
Stuck deep in earth, and quiver'd where it stood.
But Oenomas received the Cretan's stroke;
The forceful spear his hollow corslet broke,
It ripp'd his belly with a ghastly wound,
And roll'd the smoking entrails on the ground.
Stretch'd on the plain, he sobs away his breath,
And, furious, grasps the bloody dust in death.
The victor from his breast the weapon tears;
His spoils he could not, for the shower of spears.
Though now unfit an active war to wage,
Heavy with cumbrous arms, stiff with cold age,
His listless limbs unable for the course,
In standing fight he yet maintains his force;
Till faint with labour, and by foes repell'd,
His tired slow steps he drags from off the field.
Deiphobus beheld him as he pass'd,
And, fired with hate, a parting javelin cast:
The javelin err'd, but held its course along,
And pierced Ascalaphus, the brave and young:
The son of Mars fell gasping on the ground,
And gnash'd the dust, all bloody with his wound.

Nor knew the furious father of his fall;
High-throned amidst the great Olympian hall,
On golden clouds th' immortal synod sate;
Detain'd from bloody war by Jove and Fate.

Now, where in dust the breathless hero lay,
For slain Ascalaphus commenced the fray,
Deiphobus to seize his helmet flies,
And from his temples rends the glittering prize;
Valiant as Mars, Meriones drew near,
And on his loaded arm discharged his spear:
He drops the weight, disabled with the pain;
The hollow helmet rings against the plain.
Swift as a vulture leaping on his prey,
From his torn arm the Grecian rent away
The reeking javelin, and rejoin'd his friends.
His wounded brother good Polites tends;
Around his waist his pious arms he threw,
And from the rage of battle gently drew:
Him his swift coursers, on his splendid car,
Rapt from the lessening thunder of the war;
To Troy they drove him, groaning from the shore,
And sprinkling, as he pass'd, the sands with gore.

Meanwhile fresh slaughter bathes the sanguine ground,
Heaps fall on heaps, and heaven and earth resound.
Bold Aphareus by great neas bled;
As toward the chief he turn'd his daring head,
He pierced his throat; the bending head, depress'd
Beneath his helmet, nods upon his breast;
His shield reversed o'er the fallen warrior lies,
And everlasting slumber seals his eyes.
Antilochus, as Thoon turn'd him round,
Transpierced his back with a dishonest wound:
The hollow vein, that to the neck extends
Along the chine, his eager javelin rends:
Supine he falls, and to his social train
Spreads his imploring arms, but spreads in vain.
Th' exulting victor, leaping where he lay,
From his broad shoulders tore the spoils away;
His time observed; for closed by foes around,
On all sides thick the peals of arms resound.
His shield emboss'd the ringing storm sustains,
But he impervious and untouch'd remains.
(Great Neptune's care preserved from hostile rage
This youth, the joy of Nestor's glorious age.)
In arms intrepid, with the first he fought,
Faced every foe, and every danger sought;
His winged lance, resistless as the wind,
Obeys each motion of the master's mind!
Restless it flies, impatient to be free,
And meditates the distant enemy.
The son of Asius, Adamas, drew near,
And struck his target with the brazen spear
Fierce in his front: but Neptune wards the blow,
And blunts the javelin of th' eluded foe:
In the broad buckler half the weapon stood,
Splinter'd on earth flew half the broken wood.
Disarm'd, he mingled in the Trojan crew;
But Merion's spear o'ertook him as he flew,
Deep in the belly's rim an entrance found,
Where sharp the pang, and mortal is the wound.
Bending he fell, and doubled to the ground,
Lay panting. Thus an ox in fetters tied,
While death's strong pangs distend his labouring side,
His bulk enormous on the field displays;
His heaving heart beats thick as ebbing life decays.
The spear the conqueror from his body drew,
And death's dim shadows swarm before his view.
Next brave Deipyrus in dust was laid:
King Helenus waved high the Thracian blade,
And smote his temples with an arm so strong,
The helm fell off, and roll'd amid the throng:
There for some luckier Greek it rests a prize;
For dark in death the godlike owner lies!
Raging with grief, great Menelaus burns,
And fraught with vengeance, to the victor turns:
That shook the ponderous lance, in act to throw;
And this stood adverse with the bended bow:
Full on his breast the Trojan arrow fell,
But harmless bounded from the plated steel.
As on some ample barn's well harden'd floor,
(The winds collected at each open door,)
While the broad fan with force is whirl'd around,
Light leaps the golden grain, resulting from the ground:
So from the steel that guards Atrides' heart,
Repell'd to distance flies the bounding dart.
Atrides, watchful of the unwary foe,
Pierced with his lance the hand that grasp'd the bow.
And nailed it to the yew: the wounded hand
Trail'd the long lance that mark'd with blood the sand:
But good Agenor gently from the wound
The spear solicits, and the bandage bound;
A sling's soft wool, snatch'd from a soldier's side,
At once the tent and ligature supplied.

Behold! Pisander, urged by fate's decree,
Springs through the ranks to fall, and fall by thee,
Great Menelaus! to enchance thy fame:
High-towering in the front, the warrior came.
First the sharp lance was by Atrides thrown;
The lance far distant by the winds was blown.
Nor pierced Pisander through Atrides' shield:
Pisander's spear fell shiver'd on the field.
Not so discouraged, to the future blind,
Vain dreams of conquest swell his haughty mind;
Dauntless he rushes where the Spartan lord
Like lightning brandish'd his far beaming sword.
His left arm high opposed the shining shield:
His right beneath, the cover'd pole-axe held;
(An olive's cloudy grain the handle made,
Distinct with studs, and brazen was the blade;)
This on the helm discharged a noble blow;
The plume dropp'd nodding to the plain below,
Shorn from the crest. Atrides waved his steel:
Deep through his front the weighty falchion fell;
The crashing bones before its force gave way;
In dust and blood the groaning hero lay:
Forced from their ghastly orbs, and spouting gore,
The clotted eye-balls tumble on the shore.
And fierce Atrides spurn'd him as he bled,
Tore off his arms, and, loud-exulting, said:

"Thus, Trojans, thus, at length be taught to fear;
O race perfidious, who delight in war!
Already noble deeds ye have perform'd;
A princess raped transcends a navy storm'd:
In such bold feats your impious might approve,
Without th' assistance, or the fear of Jove.
The violated rites, the ravish'd dame;
Our heroes slaughter'd and our ships on flame,
Crimes heap'd on crimes, shall bend your glory down,
And whelm in ruins yon flagitious town.
O thou, great father! lord of earth and skies,
Above the thought of man, supremely wise!
If from thy hand the fates of mortals flow,
From whence this favour to an impious foe?
A godless crew, abandon'd and unjust,
Still breathing rapine, violence, and lust?
The best of things, beyond their measure, cloy;
Sleep's balmy blessing, love's endearing joy;
The feast, the dance; whate'er mankind desire,
Even the sweet charms of sacred numbers tire.
But Troy for ever reaps a dire delight
In thirst of slaughter, and in lust of fight."

This said, he seized (while yet the carcase heaved)
The bloody armour, which his train received:
Then sudden mix'd among the warring crew,
And the bold son of Pylaemenes slew.
Harpalion had through Asia travell'd far,
Following his martial father to the war:
Through filial love he left his native shore,
Never, ah, never to behold it more!
His unsuccessful spear he chanced to fling
Against the target of the Spartan king;
Thus of his lance disarm'd, from death he flies,
And turns around his apprehensive eyes.
Him, through the hip transpiercing as he fled,
The shaft of Merion mingled with the dead.
Beneath the bone the glancing point descends,
And, driving down, the swelling bladder rends:
Sunk in his sad companions' arms he lay,
And in short pantings sobb'd his soul away;
(Like some vile worm extended on the ground;)
While life's red torrent gush'd from out the wound.

Him on his car the Paphlagonian train
In slow procession bore from off the plain.
The pensive father, father now no more!
Attends the mournful pomp along the shore;
And unavailing tears profusely shed;
And, unrevenged, deplored his offspring dead.

Paris from far the moving sight beheld,
With pity soften'd and with fury swell'd:
His honour'd host, a youth of matchless grace,
And loved of all the Paphlagonian race!
With his full strength he bent his angry bow,
And wing'd the feather'd vengeance at the foe.
A chief there was, the brave Euchenor named,
For riches much, and more for virtue famed.
Who held his seat in Corinth's stately town;
Polydus' son, a seer of old renown.
Oft had the father told his early doom,
By arms abroad, or slow disease at home:
He climb'd his vessel, prodigal of breath,
And chose the certain glorious path to death.
Beneath his ear the pointed arrow went;
The soul came issuing at the narrow vent:
His limbs, unnerved, drop useless on the ground,
And everlasting darkness shades him round.

Nor knew great Hector how his legions yield,
(Wrapp'd in the cloud and tumult of the field:)
Wide on the left the force of Greece commands,
And conquest hovers o'er th' Achaian bands;
With such a tide superior virtue sway'd,
And he that shakes the solid earth gave aid.
But in the centre Hector fix'd remain'd,
Where first the gates were forced, and bulwarks gain'd;
There, on the margin of the hoary deep,
(Their naval station where the Ajaces keep.
And where low walls confine the beating tides,
Whose humble barrier scarce the foe divides;
Where late in fight both foot and horse engaged,
And all the thunder of the battle raged,)
There join'd, the whole Boeotian strength remains,
The proud Iaonians with their sweeping trains,
Locrians and Phthians, and th' Epaean force;
But join'd, repel not Hector's fiery course.
The flower of Athens, Stichius, Phidas, led;
Bias and great Menestheus at their head:
Meges the strong the Epaean bands controll'd,
And Dracius prudent, and Amphion bold:
The Phthians, Medon, famed for martial might,
And brave Podarces, active in the fight.
This drew from Phylacus his noble line;
Iphiclus' son: and that (Oileus) thine:
(Young Ajax' brother, by a stolen embrace;
He dwelt far distant from his native place,
By his fierce step-dame from his father's reign
Expell'd and exiled for her brother slain:)
These rule the Phthians, and their arms employ,
Mix'd with Boeotians, on the shores of Troy.

Now side by side, with like unwearied care,
Each Ajax laboured through the field of war:
So when two lordly bulls, with equal toil,
Force the bright ploughshare through the fallow soil,
Join'd to one yoke, the stubborn earth they tear,
And trace large furrows with the shining share;
O'er their huge limbs the foam descends in snow,
And streams of sweat down their sour foreheads flow.
A train of heroes followed through the field,
Who bore by turns great Ajax' sevenfold shield;
Whene'er he breathed, remissive of his might,
Tired with the incessant slaughters of the fight.
No following troops his brave associate grace:
In close engagement an unpractised race,
The Locrian squadrons nor the javelin wield,
Nor bear the helm, nor lift the moony shield;
But skill'd from far the flying shaft to wing,
Or whirl the sounding pebble from the sling,
Dexterous with these they aim a certain wound,
Or fell the distant warrior to the ground.
Thus in the van the Telamonian train,
Throng'd in bright arms, a pressing fight maintain:
Far in the rear the Locrian archers lie,
Whose stones and arrows intercept the sky,
The mingled tempest on the foes they pour;
Troy's scattering orders open to the shower.

Now had the Greeks eternal fame acquired,
And the gall'd Ilians to their walls retired;
But sage Polydamas, discreetly brave,
Address'd great Hector, and this counsel gave:

"Though great in all, thou seem'st averse to lend
Impartial audience to a faithful friend;
To gods and men thy matchless worth is known,
And every art of glorious war thy own;
But in cool thought and counsel to excel,
How widely differs this from warring well!
Content with what the bounteous gods have given,
Seek not alone to engross the gifts of Heaven.
To some the powers of bloody war belong,
To some sweet music and the charm of song;
To few, and wondrous few, has Jove assign'd
A wise, extensive, all-considering mind;
Their guardians these, the nations round confess,
And towns and empires for their safety bless.
If Heaven have lodged this virtue in my breast,
Attend, O Hector! what I judge the best,
See, as thou mov'st, on dangers dangers spread,
And war's whole fury burns around thy head.
Behold! distress'd within yon hostile wall,
How many Trojans yield, disperse, or fall!
What troops, out-number'd, scarce the war maintain!
And what brave heroes at the ships lie slain!
Here cease thy fury: and, the chiefs and kings
Convoked to council, weigh the sum of things.
Whether (the gods succeeding our desires)
To yon tall ships to bear the Trojan fires;
Or quit the fleet, and pass unhurt away,
Contented with the conquest of the day.
I fear, I fear, lest Greece, not yet undone,
Pay the large debt of last revolving sun;
Achilles, great Achilles, yet remains
On yonder decks, and yet o'erlooks the plains!"

The counsel pleased; and Hector, with a bound,
Leap'd from his chariot on the trembling ground;
Swift as he leap'd his clanging arms resound.
"To guard this post (he cried) thy art employ,
And here detain the scatter'd youth of Troy;
Where yonder heroes faint, I bend my way,
And hasten back to end the doubtful day."

This said, the towering chief prepares to go,
Shakes his white plumes that to the breezes flow,
And seems a moving mountain topp'd with snow.
Through all his host, inspiring force, he flies,
And bids anew the martial thunder rise.
To Panthus' son, at Hector's high command
Haste the bold leaders of the Trojan band:
But round the battlements, and round the plain,
For many a chief he look'd, but look'd in vain;
Deiphobus, nor Helenus the seer,
Nor Asius' son, nor Asius' self appear:
For these were pierced with many a ghastly wound,
Some cold in death, some groaning on the ground;
Some low in dust, (a mournful object) lay;
High on the wall some breathed their souls away.

Far on the left, amid the throng he found
(Cheering the troops, and dealing deaths around)
The graceful Paris; whom, with fury moved,
Opprobrious thus, th' impatient chief reproved:

"Ill-fated Paris! slave to womankind,
As smooth of face as fraudulent of mind!
Where is Deiphobus, where Asius gone?
The godlike father, and th' intrepid son?
The force of Helenus, dispensing fate;
And great Othryoneus, so fear'd of late?
Black fate hang's o'er thee from th' avenging gods,
Imperial Troy from her foundations nods;
Whelm'd in thy country's ruin shalt thou fall,
And one devouring vengeance swallow all."

When Paris thus: "My brother and my friend,
Thy warm impatience makes thy tongue offend,
In other battles I deserved thy blame,
Though then not deedless, nor unknown to fame:
But since yon rampart by thy arms lay low,
I scatter'd slaughter from my fatal bow.
The chiefs you seek on yonder shore lie slain;
Of all those heroes, two alone remain;
Deiphobus, and Helenus the seer,
Each now disabled by a hostile spear.
Go then, successful, where thy soul inspires:
This heart and hand shall second all thy fires:
What with this arm I can, prepare to know,
Till death for death be paid, and blow for blow.
But 'tis not ours, with forces not our own
To combat: strength is of the gods alone."
These words the hero's angry mind assuage:
Then fierce they mingle where the thickest rage.
Around Polydamas, distain'd with blood,
Cebrion, Phalces, stern Orthaeus stood,
Palmus, with Polypoetes the divine,
And two bold brothers of Hippotion's line
(Who reach'd fair Ilion, from Ascania far,
The former day; the next engaged in war).
As when from gloomy clouds a whirlwind springs,
That bears Jove's thunder on its dreadful wings,
Wide o'er the blasted fields the tempest sweeps;
Then, gather'd, settles on the hoary deeps;
The afflicted deeps tumultuous mix and roar;
The waves behind impel the waves before,
Wide rolling, foaming high, and tumbling to the shore:
Thus rank on rank, the thick battalions throng,
Chief urged on chief, and man drove man along.
Far o'er the plains, in dreadful order bright,
The brazen arms reflect a beamy light:
Full in the blazing van great Hector shined,
Like Mars commission'd to confound mankind.
Before him flaming his enormous shield,
Like the broad sun, illumined all the field;
His nodding helm emits a streamy ray;
His piercing eyes through all the battle stray,
And, while beneath his targe he flash'd along,
Shot terrors round, that wither'd e'en the strong.

Thus stalk'd he, dreadful; death was in his look:
Whole nations fear'd; but not an Argive shook.
The towering Ajax, with an ample stride,
Advanced the first, and thus the chief defied:

"Hector! come on; thy empty threats forbear;
'Tis not thy arm, 'tis thundering Jove we fear:
The skill of war to us not idly given,
Lo! Greece is humbled, not by Troy, but Heaven.
Vain are the hopes that haughty mind imparts,
To force our fleet: the Greeks have hands and hearts.
Long ere in flames our lofty navy fall,
Your boasted city, and your god-built wall,
Shall sink beneath us, smoking on the ground;
And spread a long unmeasured ruin round.
The time shall come, when, chased along the plain,
Even thou shalt call on Jove, and call in vain;
Even thou shalt wish, to aid thy desperate course,
The wings of falcons for thy flying horse;
Shalt run, forgetful of a warrior's fame,
While clouds of friendly dust conceal thy shame."

As thus he spoke, behold, in open view,
On sounding wings a dexter eagle flew.
To Jove's glad omen all the Grecians rise,
And hail, with shouts, his progress through the skies:
Far-echoing clamours bound from side to side;
They ceased; and thus the chief of Troy replied:

"From whence this menace, this insulting strain?
Enormous boaster! doom'd to vaunt in vain.
So may the gods on Hector life bestow,
(Not that short life which mortals lead below,
But such as those of Jove's high lineage born,
The blue-eyed maid, or he that gilds the morn,)
As this decisive day shall end the fame
Of Greece, and Argos be no more a name.
And thou, imperious! if thy madness wait
The lance of Hector, thou shalt meet thy fate:
That giant-corse, extended on the shore,
Shall largely feast the fowls with fat and gore."

He said; and like a lion stalk'd along:
With shouts incessant earth and ocean rung,
Sent from his following host: the Grecian train
With answering thunders fill'd the echoing plain;
A shout that tore heaven's concave, and, above,
Shook the fix'd splendours of the throne of Jove.

But not the genial feast, nor flowing bowl,
Could charm the cares of Nestor's watchful soul;
His startled ears the increasing cries attend;
Then thus, impatient, to his wounded friend:

"What new alarm, divine Machaon, say,
What mix'd events attend this mighty day?
Hark! how the shouts divide, and how they meet,
And now come full, and thicken to the fleet!
Here with the cordial draught dispel thy care,
Let Hecamede the strengthening bath prepare,
Refresh thy wound, and cleanse the clotted gore;
While I the adventures of the day explore."

He said: and, seizing Thrasymedes' shield,
(His valiant offspring,) hasten'd to the field;
(That day the son his father's buckler bore;)
Then snatch'd a lance, and issued from the door.
Soon as the prospect open'd to his view,
His wounded eyes the scene of sorrow knew;
Dire disarray! the tumult of the fight,
The wall in ruins, and the Greeks in flight.
As when old ocean's silent surface sleeps,
The waves just heaving on the purple deeps:
While yet the expected tempest hangs on high,
Weighs down the cloud, and blackens in the sky,
The mass of waters will no wind obey;
Jove sends one gust, and bids them roll away.
While wavering counsels thus his mind engage,
Fluctuates in doubtful thought the Pylian sage,
To join the host, or to the general haste;
Debating long, he fixes on the last:
Yet, as he moves, the sight his bosom warms,
The field rings dreadful with the clang of arms,
The gleaming falchions flash, the javelins fly;
Blows echo blows, and all or kill or die.

Him, in his march, the wounded princes meet,
By tardy steps ascending from the fleet:
The king of men, Ulysses the divine,
And who to Tydeus owes his noble line.
(Their ships at distance from the battle stand,
In lines advanced along the shelving strand:
Whose bay, the fleet unable to contain
At length; beside the margin of the main,
Rank above rank, the crowded ships they moor:
Who landed first, lay highest on the shore.)
Supported on the spears, they took their way,
Unfit to fight, but anxious for the day.
Nestor's approach alarm'd each Grecian breast,
Whom thus the general of the host address'd:

"O grace and glory of the Achaian name;
What drives thee, Nestor, from the field of fame?
Shall then proud Hector see his boast fulfill'd,
Our fleets in ashes, and our heroes kill'd?
Such was his threat, ah! now too soon made good,
On many a Grecian bosom writ in blood.
Is every heart inflamed with equal rage
Against your king, nor will one chief engage?
And have I lived to see with mournful eyes
In every Greek a new Achilles rise?"

Gerenian Nestor then: "So fate has will'd;
And all-confirming time has fate fulfill'd.
Not he that thunders from the aerial bower,
Not Jove himself, upon the past has power.
The wall, our late inviolable bound,
And best defence, lies smoking on the ground:
Even to the ships their conquering arms extend,
And groans of slaughter'd Greeks to heaven ascend.
On speedy measures then employ your thought
In such distress! if counsel profit aught:
Arms cannot much: though Mars our souls incite,
These gaping wounds withhold us from the fight."

To him the monarch: "That our army bends,
That Troy triumphant our high fleet ascends,
And that the rampart, late our surest trust
And best defence, lies smoking in the dust;
All this from Jove's afflictive hand we bear,
Who, far from Argos, wills our ruin here.
Past are the days when happier Greece was blest,
And all his favour, all his aid confess'd;
Now heaven averse, our hands from battle ties,
And lifts the Trojan glory to the skies.
Cease we at length to waste our blood in vain,
And launch what ships lie nearest to the main;
Leave these at anchor, till the coming night:
Then, if impetuous Troy forbear the fight,
Bring all to sea, and hoist each sail for flight.
Better from evils, well foreseen, to run,
Than perish in the danger we may shun."

Thus he. The sage Ulysses thus replies,
While anger flash'd from his disdainful eyes:
"What shameful words (unkingly as thou art)
Fall from that trembling tongue and timorous heart?
Oh were thy sway the curse of meaner powers,
And thou the shame of any host but ours!
A host, by Jove endued with martial might,
And taught to conquer, or to fall in fight:
Adventurous combats and bold wars to wage,
Employ'd our youth, and yet employs our age.
And wilt thou thus desert the Trojan plain?
And have whole streams of blood been spilt in vain?
In such base sentence if thou couch thy fear,
Speak it in whispers, lest a Greek should hear.
Lives there a man so dead to fame, who dares
To think such meanness, or the thought declares?
And comes it even from him whose sovereign sway
The banded legions of all Greece obey?
Is this a general's voice that calls to flight,
While war hangs doubtful, while his soldiers fight?
What more could Troy? What yet their fate denies
Thou givest the foe: all Greece becomes their prize.
No more the troops (our hoisted sails in view,
Themselves abandon'd) shall the fight pursue;
But thy ships flying, with despair shall see;
And owe destruction to a prince like thee."

"Thy just reproofs (Atrides calm replies)
Like arrows pierce me, for thy words are wise.
Unwilling as I am to lose the host,
I force not Greece to quit this hateful coast;
Glad I submit, whoe'er, or young, or old,
Aught, more conducive to our weal, unfold."

Tydides cut him short, and thus began:
"Such counsel if you seek, behold the man
Who boldly gives it, and what he shall say,
Young though he be, disdain not to obey:
A youth, who from the mighty Tydeus springs,
May speak to councils and assembled kings.
Hear then in me the great Oenides' son,
Whose honoured dust (his race of glory run)
Lies whelm'd in ruins of the Theban wall;
Brave in his life, and glorious in his fall.
With three bold sons was generous Prothous bless'd,
Who Pleuron's walls and Calydon possess'd;
Melas and Agrius, but (who far surpass'd
The rest in courage) Oeneus was the last.
From him, my sire. From Calydon expell'd,
He pass'd to Argos, and in exile dwell'd;
The monarch's daughter there (so Jove ordain'd)
He won, and flourish'd where Adrastus reign'd;
There, rich in fortune's gifts, his acres till'd,
Beheld his vines their liquid harvest yield,
And numerous flocks that whiten'd all the field.
Such Tydeus was, the foremost once in fame!
Nor lives in Greece a stranger to his name.
Then, what for common good my thoughts inspire,
Attend, and in the son respect the sire.
Though sore of battle, though with wounds oppress'd,
Let each go forth, and animate the rest,
Advance the glory which he cannot share,
Though not partaker, witness of the war.
But lest new wounds on wounds o'erpower us quite,
Beyond the missile javelin's sounding flight,
Safe let us stand; and, from the tumult far,
Inspire the ranks, and rule the distant war."

He added not: the listening kings obey,
Slow moving on; Atrides leads the way.
The god of ocean (to inflame their rage)
Appears a warrior furrowed o'er with age;
Press'd in his own, the general's hand he took,
And thus the venerable hero spoke:

"Atrides! lo! with what disdainful eye
Achilles sees his country's forces fly;
Blind, impious man! whose anger is his guide,
Who glories in unutterable pride.
So may he perish, so may Jove disclaim
The wretch relentless, and o'erwhelm with shame!
But Heaven forsakes not thee: o'er yonder sands
Soon shall thou view the scattered Trojan bands
Fly diverse; while proud kings, and chiefs renown'd,
Driven heaps on heaps, with clouds involved around
Of rolling dust, their winged wheels employ
To hide their ignominious heads in Troy."

He spoke, then rush'd amid the warrior crew,
And sent his voice before him as he flew,
Loud, as the shout encountering armies yield
When twice ten thousand shake the labouring field;
Such was the voice, and such the thundering sound
Of him whose trident rends the solid ground.
Each Argive bosom beats to meet the fight,
And grisly war appears a pleasing sight.

Meantime Saturnia from Olympus' brow,
High-throned in gold, beheld the fields below;
With joy the glorious conflict she survey'd,
Where her great brother gave the Grecians aid.
But placed aloft, on Ida's shady height
She sees her Jove, and trembles at the sight.
Jove to deceive, what methods shall she try,
What arts, to blind his all-beholding eye?
At length she trusts her power; resolved to prove
The old, yet still successful, cheat of love;
Against his wisdom to oppose her charms,
And lull the lord of thunders in her arms.

Swift to her bright apartment she repairs,
Sacred to dress and beauty's pleasing cares:
With skill divine had Vulcan form'd the bower,
Safe from access of each intruding power.
Touch'd with her secret key, the doors unfold:
Self-closed, behind her shut the valves of gold.
Here first she bathes; and round her body pours
Soft oils of fragrance, and ambrosial showers:
The winds, perfumed, the balmy gale convey
Through heaven, through earth, and all the aerial way:
Spirit divine! whose exhalation greets
The sense of gods with more than mortal sweets.
Thus while she breathed of heaven, with decent pride
Her artful hands the radiant tresses tied;
Part on her head in shining ringlets roll'd,
Part o'er her shoulders waved like melted gold.
Around her next a heavenly mantle flow'd,
That rich with Pallas' labour'd colours glow'd:
Large clasps of gold the foldings gather'd round,
A golden zone her swelling bosom bound.
Far-beaming pendants tremble in her ear,
Each gem illumined with a triple star.
Then o'er her head she cast a veil more white
Than new-fallen snow, and dazzling as the light.
Last her fair feet celestial sandals grace.
Thus issuing radiant with majestic pace,
Forth from the dome the imperial goddess moves,
And calls the mother of the smiles and loves.

"How long (to Venus thus apart she cried)
Shall human strife celestial minds divide?
Ah yet, will Venus aid Saturnia's joy,
And set aside the cause of Greece and Troy?"

"Let heaven's dread empress (Cytheraea said)
Speak her request, and deem her will obey'd."

"Then grant me (said the queen) those conquering charms,
That power, which mortals and immortals warms,
That love, which melts mankind in fierce desires,
And burns the sons of heaven with sacred fires!

"For lo! I haste to those remote abodes,
Where the great parents, (sacred source of gods!)
Ocean and Tethys their old empire keep,
On the last limits of the land and deep.
In their kind arms my tender years were past;
What time old Saturn, from Olympus cast,
Of upper heaven to Jove resign'd the reign,
Whelm'd under the huge mass of earth and main.
For strife, I hear, has made the union cease,
Which held so long that ancient pair in peace.
What honour, and what love, shall I obtain,
If I compose those fatal feuds again;
Once more their minds in mutual ties engage,
And, what my youth has owed, repay their age!"

She said. With awe divine, the queen of love
Obey'd the sister and the wife of Jove;
And from her fragrant breast the zone embraced,
With various skill and high embroidery graced.
In this was every art, and every charm,
To win the wisest, and the coldest warm:
Fond love, the gentle vow, the gay desire,
The kind deceit, the still-reviving fire,
Persuasive speech, and the more persuasive sighs,
Silence that spoke, and eloquence of eyes.
This on her hand the Cyprian Goddess laid:
"Take this, and with it all thy wish;" she said.
With smiles she took the charm; and smiling press'd
The powerful cestus to her snowy breast.

Then Venus to the courts of Jove withdrew;
Whilst from Olympus pleased Saturnia flew.
O'er high Pieria thence her course she bore,
O'er fair Emathia's ever-pleasing shore,
O'er Hemus' hills with snows eternal crown'd;
Nor once her flying foot approach'd the ground.
Then taking wing from Athos' lofty steep,
She speeds to Lemnos o'er the rolling deep,
And seeks the cave of Death's half-brother, Sleep.

"Sweet pleasing Sleep! (Saturnia thus began)
Who spread'st thy empire o'er each god and man;
If e'er obsequious to thy Juno's will,
O power of slumbers! hear, and favour still.
Shed thy soft dews on Jove's immortal eyes,
While sunk in love's entrancing joys he lies.
A splendid footstool, and a throne, that shine
With gold unfading, Somnus, shall be thine;
The work of Vulcan; to indulge thy ease,
When wine and feasts thy golden humours please."

"Imperial dame (the balmy power replies),
Great Saturn's heir, and empress of the skies!
O'er other gods I spread my easy chain;
The sire of all, old Ocean, owns my reign.
And his hush'd waves lie silent on the main.
But how, unbidden, shall I dare to steep
Jove's awful temples in the dew of sleep?
Long since, too venturous, at thy bold command,
On those eternal lids I laid my hand;
What time, deserting Ilion's wasted plain,
His conquering son, Alcides, plough'd the main.
When lo! the deeps arise, the tempests roar,
And drive the hero to the Coan shore:
Great Jove, awaking, shook the blest abodes
With rising wrath, and tumbled gods on gods;
Me chief he sought, and from the realms on high
Had hurl'd indignant to the nether sky,
But gentle Night, to whom I fled for aid,
(The friend of earth and heaven,) her wings display'd;
Impower'd the wrath of gods and men to tame,
Even Jove revered the venerable dame."

"Vain are thy fears (the queen of heaven replies,
And, speaking, rolls her large majestic eyes);
Think'st thou that Troy has Jove's high favour won,
Like great Alcides, his all-conquering son?
Hear, and obey the mistress of the skies,
Nor for the deed expect a vulgar prize;
For know, thy loved-one shall be ever thine,
The youngest Grace, Pasithae the divine."

"Swear then (he said) by those tremendous floods
That roar through hell, and bind the invoking gods:
Let the great parent earth one hand sustain,
And stretch the other o'er the sacred main:
Call the black Titans, that with Chronos dwell,
To hear and witness from the depths of hell;
That she, my loved-one, shall be ever mine,
The youngest Grace, Pasithae the divine."

The queen assents, and from the infernal bowers
Invokes the sable subtartarean powers,
And those who rule the inviolable floods,
Whom mortals name the dread Titanian gods.

Then swift as wind, o'er Lemnos' smoky isle
They wing their way, and Imbrus' sea-beat soil;
Through air, unseen, involved in darkness glide,
And light on Lectos, on the point of Ide:
(Mother of savages, whose echoing hills
Are heard resounding with a hundred rills:)
Fair Ida trembles underneath the god;
Hush'd are her mountains, and her forests nod.
There on a fir, whose spiry branches rise
To join its summit to the neighbouring skies;
Dark in embowering shade, conceal'd from sight,
Sat Sleep, in likeness of the bird of night.
(Chalcis his name by those of heavenly birth,
But call'd Cymindis by the race of earth.)

To Ida's top successful Juno flies;
Great Jove surveys her with desiring eyes:
The god, whose lightning sets the heavens on fire,
Through all his bosom feels the fierce desire;
Fierce as when first by stealth he seized her charms,
Mix'd with her soul, and melted in her arms:
Fix'd on her eyes he fed his eager look,
Then press'd her hand, and thus with transport spoke:

"Why comes my goddess from the ethereal sky,
And not her steeds and flaming chariot nigh?"

Then she--"I haste to those remote abodes
Where the great parents of the deathless gods,
The reverend Ocean and gray Tethys, reign,
On the last limits of the land and main.
I visit these, to whose indulgent cares
I owe the nursing of my tender years:
For strife, I hear, has made that union cease
Which held so long that ancient pair in peace.
The steeds, prepared my chariot to convey
O'er earth and seas, and through the aerial way,
Wait under Ide: of thy superior power
To ask consent, I leave the Olympian bower;
Nor seek, unknown to thee, the sacred cells
Deep under seas, where hoary Ocean dwells."

"For that (said Jove) suffice another day!
But eager love denies the least delay.
Let softer cares the present hour employ,
And be these moments sacred all to joy.
Ne'er did my soul so strong a passion prove,
Or for an earthly, or a heavenly love:
Not when I press'd Ixion's matchless dame,
Whence rose Pirithous like the gods in fame:
Not when fair Danae felt the shower of gold
Stream into life, whence Perseus brave and bold.
Not thus I burn'd for either Theban dame:
(Bacchus from this, from that Alcides came:)
Nor Phoenix' daughter, beautiful and young,
Whence godlike Rhadamanth and Minos sprung.
Not thus I burn'd for fair Latona's face,
Nor comelier Ceres' more majestic grace.
Not thus even for thyself I felt desire,
As now my veins receive the pleasing fire."

He spoke; the goddess with the charming eyes
Glows with celestial red, and thus replies:
"Is this a scene for love? On Ida's height,
Exposed to mortal and immortal sight!
Our joys profaned by each familiar eye;
The sport of heaven, and fable of the sky:
How shall I e'er review the blest abodes,
Or mix among the senate of the gods?
Shall I not think, that, with disorder'd charms,
All heaven beholds me recent from thy arms?
With skill divine has Vulcan form'd thy bower,
Sacred to love and to the genial hour;
If such thy will, to that recess retire,
In secret there indulge thy soft desire."

She ceased; and, smiling with superior love,
Thus answer'd mild the cloud-compelling Jove:
"Nor god nor mortal shall our joys behold,
Shaded with clouds, and circumfused in gold;
Not even the sun, who darts through heaven his rays,
And whose broad eye the extended earth surveys."

Gazing he spoke, and, kindling at the view,
His eager arms around the goddess threw.
Glad Earth perceives, and from her bosom pours
Unbidden herbs and voluntary flowers:
Thick new-born violets a soft carpet spread,
And clustering lotos swell'd the rising bed,
And sudden hyacinths the turf bestrow,
And flamy crocus made the mountain glow
There golden clouds conceal the heavenly pair,
Steep'd in soft joys and circumfused with air;
Celestial dews, descending o'er the ground,
Perfume the mount, and breathe ambrosia round:
At length, with love and sleep's soft power oppress'd,
The panting thunderer nods, and sinks to rest.

Now to the navy borne on silent wings,
To Neptune's ear soft Sleep his message brings;
Beside him sudden, unperceived, he stood,
And thus with gentle words address'd the god:

"Now, Neptune! now, the important hour employ,
To check a while the haughty hopes of Troy:
While Jove yet rests, while yet my vapours shed
The golden vision round his sacred head;
For Juno's love, and Somnus' pleasing ties,
Have closed those awful and eternal eyes."
Thus having said, the power of slumber flew,
On human lids to drop the balmy dew.
Neptune, with zeal increased, renews his care,
And towering in the foremost ranks of war,
Indignant thus--"Oh once of martial fame!
O Greeks! if yet ye can deserve the name!
This half-recover'd day shall Troy obtain?
Shall Hector thunder at your ships again?
Lo! still he vaunts, and threats the fleet with fires,
While stern Achilles in his wrath retires.
One hero's loss too tamely you deplore,
Be still yourselves, and ye shall need no more.
Oh yet, if glory any bosom warms,
Brace on your firmest helms, and stand to arms:
His strongest spear each valiant Grecian wield,
Each valiant Grecian seize his broadest shield;
Let to the weak the lighter arms belong,
The ponderous targe be wielded by the strong.
Thus arm'd, not Hector shall our presence stay;
Myself, ye Greeks! myself will lead the way."

The troops assent; their martial arms they change:
The busy chiefs their banded legions range.
The kings, though wounded, and oppress'd with pain,
With helpful hands themselves assist the train.
The strong and cumbrous arms the valiant wield,
The weaker warrior takes a lighter shield.
Thus sheath'd in shining brass, in bright array
The legions march, and Neptune leads the way:
His brandish'd falchion flames before their eyes,
Like lightning flashing through the frighted skies.
Clad in his might, the earth-shaking power appears;
Pale mortals tremble, and confess their fears.

Troy's great defender stands alone unawed,
Arms his proud host, and dares oppose a god:
And lo! the god, and wondrous man, appear:
The sea's stern ruler there, and Hector here.
The roaring main, at her great master's call,
Rose in huge ranks, and form'd a watery wall
Around the ships: seas hanging o'er the shores,
Both armies join: earth thunders, ocean roars.
Not half so loud the bellowing deeps resound,
When stormy winds disclose the dark profound;
Less loud the winds that from the olian hall
Roar through the woods, and make whole forests fall;
Less loud the woods, when flames in torrents pour,
Catch the dry mountain, and its shades devour;
With such a rage the meeting hosts are driven,
And such a clamour shakes the sounding heaven.
The first bold javelin, urged by Hector's force,
Direct at Ajax' bosom winged its course;
But there no pass the crossing belts afford,
(One braced his shield, and one sustain'd his sword.)
Then back the disappointed Trojan drew,
And cursed the lance that unavailing flew:
But 'scaped not Ajax; his tempestuous hand
A ponderous stone upheaving from the sand,
(Where heaps laid loose beneath the warrior's feet,
Or served to ballast, or to prop the fleet,)
Toss'd round and round, the missive marble flings;
On the razed shield the fallen ruin rings,
Full on his breast and throat with force descends;
Nor deaden'd there its giddy fury spends,
But whirling on, with many a fiery round,
Smokes in the dust, and ploughs into the ground.
As when the bolt, red-hissing from above,
Darts on the consecrated plant of Jove,
The mountain-oak in flaming ruin lies,
Black from the blow, and smokes of sulphur rise;
Stiff with amaze the pale beholders stand,
And own the terrors of the almighty hand!
So lies great Hector prostrate on the shore;
His slacken'd hand deserts the lance it bore;
His following shield the fallen chief o'erspread;
Beneath his helmet dropp'd his fainting head;
His load of armour, sinking to the ground,
Clanks on the field, a dead and hollow sound.
Loud shouts of triumph fill the crowded plain;
Greece sees, in hope, Troy's great defender slain:
All spring to seize him; storms of arrows fly,
And thicker javelins intercept the sky.
In vain an iron tempest hisses round;
He lies protected, and without a wound.
Polydamas, Agenor the divine,
The pious warrior of Anchises' line,
And each bold leader of the Lycian band,
With covering shields (a friendly circle) stand,
His mournful followers, with assistant care,
The groaning hero to his chariot bear;
His foaming coursers, swifter than the wind,
Speed to the town, and leave the war behind.

When now they touch'd the mead's enamell'd side,
Where gentle Xanthus rolls his easy tide,
With watery drops the chief they sprinkle round,
Placed on the margin of the flowery ground.
Raised on his knees, he now ejects the gore;
Now faints anew, low-sinking on the shore;
By fits he breathes, half views the fleeting skies,
And seals again, by fits, his swimming eyes.

Soon as the Greeks the chief's retreat beheld,
With double fury each invades the field.
Oilean Ajax first his javelin sped,
Pierced by whose point the son of Enops bled;
(Satnius the brave, whom beauteous Neis bore
Amidst her flocks on Satnio's silver shore;)
Struck through the belly's rim, the warrior lies
Supine, and shades eternal veil his eyes.
An arduous battle rose around the dead;
By turns the Greeks, by turns the Trojans bled.

Fired with revenge, Polydamas drew near,
And at Prothoenor shook the trembling spear;
The driving javelin through his shoulder thrust,
He sinks to earth, and grasps the bloody dust.
"Lo thus (the victor cries) we rule the field,
And thus their arms the race of Panthus wield:
From this unerring hand there flies no dart
But bathes its point within a Grecian heart.
Propp'd on that spear to which thou owest thy fall,
Go, guide thy darksome steps to Pluto's dreary hall."

He said, and sorrow touch'd each Argive breast:
The soul of Ajax burn'd above the rest.
As by his side the groaning warrior fell,
At the fierce foe he launch'd his piercing steel;
The foe, reclining, shunn'd the flying death;
But fate, Archilochus, demands thy breath:
Thy lofty birth no succour could impart,
The wings of death o'ertook thee on the dart;
Swift to perform heaven's fatal will, it fled
Full on the juncture of the neck and head,
And took the joint, and cut the nerves in twain:
The dropping head first tumbled on the plain.
So just the stroke, that yet the body stood
Erect, then roll'd along the sands in blood.

"Here, proud Polydamas, here turn thy eyes!
(The towering Ajax loud-insulting cries:)
Say, is this chief extended on the plain
A worthy vengeance for Prothoenor slain?
Mark well his port! his figure and his face
Nor speak him vulgar, nor of vulgar race;
Some lines, methinks, may make his lineage known,
Antenor's brother, or perhaps his son."

He spake, and smiled severe, for well he knew
The bleeding youth: Troy sadden'd at the view.
But furious Acamas avenged his cause;
As Promachus his slaughtered brother draws,
He pierced his heart--"Such fate attends you all,
Proud Argives! destined by our arms to fall.
Not Troy alone, but haughty Greece, shall share
The toils, the sorrows, and the wounds of war.
Behold your Promachus deprived of breath,
A victim owed to my brave brother's death.
Not unappeased he enters Pluto's gate,
Who leaves a brother to revenge his fate."

Heart-piercing anguish struck the Grecian host,
But touch'd the breast of bold Peneleus most;
At the proud boaster he directs his course;
The boaster flies, and shuns superior force.
But young Ilioneus received the spear;
Ilioneus, his father's only care:
(Phorbas the rich, of all the Trojan train
Whom Hermes loved, and taught the arts of gain:)
Full in his eye the weapon chanced to fall,
And from the fibres scoop'd the rooted ball,
Drove through the neck, and hurl'd him to the plain;
He lifts his miserable arms in vain!
Swift his broad falchion fierce Peneleus spread,
And from the spouting shoulders struck his head;
To earth at once the head and helmet fly;
The lance, yet sticking through the bleeding eye,
The victor seized; and, as aloft he shook
The gory visage, thus insulting spoke:

"Trojans! your great Ilioneus behold!
Haste, to his father let the tale be told:
Let his high roofs resound with frantic woe,
Such as the house of Promachus must know;
Let doleful tidings greet his mother's ear,
Such as to Promachus' sad spouse we bear,
When we victorious shall to Greece return,
And the pale matron in our triumphs mourn."

Dreadful he spoke, then toss'd the head on high;
The Trojans hear, they tremble, and they fly:
Aghast they gaze around the fleet and wall,
And dread the ruin that impends on all.

Daughters of Jove! that on Olympus shine,
Ye all-beholding, all-recording nine!
O say, when Neptune made proud Ilion yield,
What chief, what hero first embrued the field?
Of all the Grecians what immortal name,
And whose bless'd trophies, will ye raise to fame?

Thou first, great Ajax! on the unsanguined plain
Laid Hyrtius, leader of the Mysian train.
Phalces and Mermer, Nestor's son o'erthrew,
Bold Merion, Morys and Hippotion slew.
Strong Periphaetes and Prothoon bled,
By Teucer's arrows mingled with the dead,
Pierced in the flank by Menelaus' steel,
His people's pastor, Hyperenor fell;
Eternal darkness wrapp'd the warrior round,
And the fierce soul came rushing through the wound.
But stretch'd in heaps before Oileus' son,
Fall mighty numbers, mighty numbers run;
Ajax the less, of all the Grecian race
Skill'd in pursuit, and swiftest in the chase.

Now in swift flight they pass the trench profound,
And many a chief lay gasping on the ground:
Then stopp'd and panted, where the chariots lie
Fear on their cheek, and horror in their eye.
Meanwhile, awaken'd from his dream of love,
On Ida's summit sat imperial Jove:
Round the wide fields he cast a careful view,
There saw the Trojans fly, the Greeks pursue;
These proud in arms, those scatter'd o'er the plain
And, 'midst the war, the monarch of the main.
Not far, great Hector on the dust he spies,
(His sad associates round with weeping eyes,)
Ejecting blood, and panting yet for breath,
His senses wandering to the verge of death.
The god beheld him with a pitying look,
And thus, incensed, to fraudful Juno spoke:

"O thou, still adverse to the eternal will,
For ever studious in promoting ill!
Thy arts have made the godlike Hector yield,
And driven his conquering squadrons from the field.
Canst thou, unhappy in thy wiles, withstand
Our power immense, and brave the almighty hand?
Hast thou forgot, when, bound and fix'd on high,
From the vast concave of the spangled sky,
I hung thee trembling in a golden chain,
And all the raging gods opposed in vain?
Headlong I hurl'd them from the Olympian hall,
Stunn'd in the whirl, and breathless with the fall.
For godlike Hercules these deeds were done,
Nor seem'd the vengeance worthy such a son:
When, by thy wiles induced, fierce Boreas toss'd
The shipwreck'd hero on the Coan coast,
Him through a thousand forms of death I bore,
And sent to Argos, and his native shore.
Hear this, remember, and our fury dread,
Nor pull the unwilling vengeance on thy head;
Lest arts and blandishments successless prove,
Thy soft deceits, and well-dissembled love."

The Thunderer spoke: imperial Juno mourn'd,
And, trembling, these submissive words return'd:

"By every oath that powers immortal ties,
The foodful earth and all-infolding skies;
By thy black waves, tremendous Styx! that flow
Through the drear realms of gliding ghosts below;
By the dread honours of thy sacred head,
And that unbroken vow, our virgin bed!
Not by my arts the ruler of the main
Steeps Troy in blood, and ranges round the plain:
By his own ardour, his own pity sway'd,
To help his Greeks, he fought and disobey'd:
Else had thy Juno better counsels given,
And taught submission to the sire of heaven."

"Think'st thou with me? fair empress of the skies!
(The immortal father with a smile replies;)
Then soon the haughty sea-god shall obey,
Nor dare to act but when we point the way.
If truth inspires thy tongue, proclaim our will
To yon bright synod on the Olympian hill;
Our high decree let various Iris know,
And call the god that bears the silver bow.
Let her descend, and from the embattled plain
Command the sea-god to his watery reign:
While Phoebus hastes great Hector to prepare
To rise afresh, and once more wake the war:
His labouring bosom re-inspires with breath,
And calls his senses from the verge of death.
Greece chased by Troy, even to Achilles' fleet,
Shall fall by thousands at the hero's feet.
He, not untouch'd with pity, to the plain
Shall send Patroclus, but shall send in vain.
What youths he slaughters under Ilion's walls!
Even my loved son, divine Sarpedon, falls!
Vanquish'd at last by Hector's lance he lies.
Then, nor till then, shall great Achilles rise:
And lo! that instant, godlike Hector dies.
From that great hour the war's whole fortune turns,
Pallas assists, and lofty Ilion burns.
Not till that day shall Jove relax his rage,
Nor one of all the heavenly host engage
In aid of Greece. The promise of a god
I gave, and seal'd it with the almighty nod,
Achilles' glory to the stars to raise;
Such was our word, and fate the word obeys."

The trembling queen (the almighty order given)
Swift from the Idaean summit shot to heaven.
As some wayfaring man, who wanders o'er
In thought a length of lands he trod before,
Sends forth his active mind from place to place,
Joins hill to dale, and measures space with space:
So swift flew Juno to the bless'd abodes,
If thought of man can match the speed of gods.
There sat the powers in awful synod placed;
They bow'd, and made obeisance as she pass'd
Through all the brazen dome: with goblets crown'd
They hail her queen; the nectar streams around.
Fair Themis first presents the golden bowl,
And anxious asks what cares disturb her soul?

To whom the white-arm'd goddess thus replies:
"Enough thou know'st the tyrant of the skies,
Severely bent his purpose to fulfil,
Unmoved his mind, and unrestrain'd his will.
Go thou, the feasts of heaven attend thy call;
Bid the crown'd nectar circle round the hall:
But Jove shall thunder through the ethereal dome
Such stern decrees, such threaten'd woes to come,
As soon shall freeze mankind with dire surprise,
And damp the eternal banquets of the skies."

The goddess said, and sullen took her place;
Black horror sadden'd each celestial face.
To see the gathering grudge in every breast,
Smiles on her lips a spleenful joy express'd;
While on her wrinkled front, and eyebrow bent,
Sat stedfast care, and lowering discontent.
Thus she proceeds--"Attend, ye powers above!
But know, 'tis madness to contest with Jove:
Supreme he sits; and sees, in pride of sway.
Your vassal godheads grudgingly obey:
Fierce in the majesty of power controls;
Shakes all the thrones of heaven, and bends the poles.
Submiss, immortals! all he wills, obey:
And thou, great Mars, begin and show the way.
Behold Ascalaphus! behold him die,
But dare not murmur, dare not vent a sigh;
Thy own loved boasted offspring lies o'erthrown,
If that loved boasted offspring be thy own."

Stern Mars, with anguish for his slaughter'd son,
Smote his rebelling breast, and fierce begun:
"Thus then, immortals! thus shall Mars obey;
Forgive me, gods, and yield my vengeance way:
Descending first to yon forbidden plain,
The god of battles dares avenge the slain;
Dares, though the thunder bursting o'er my head
Should hurl me blazing on those heaps of dead."

With that he gives command to Fear and Flight
To join his rapid coursers for the fight:
Then grim in arms, with hasty vengeance flies;
Arms that reflect a radiance through the skies.
And now had Jove, by bold rebellion driven,
Discharged his wrath on half the host of heaven;
But Pallas, springing through the bright abode,
Starts from her azure throne to calm the god.
Struck for the immortal race with timely fear,
From frantic Mars she snatch'd the shield and spear;
Then the huge helmet lifting from his head,
Thus to the impetuous homicide she said:

"By what wild passion, furious! art thou toss'd?
Striv'st thou with Jove? thou art already lost.
Shall not the Thunderer's dread command restrain,
And was imperial Juno heard in vain?
Back to the skies wouldst thou with shame be driven,
And in thy guilt involve the host of heaven?
Ilion and Greece no more should Jove engage,
The skies would yield an ampler scene of rage;
Guilty and guiltless find an equal fate
And one vast ruin whelm the Olympian state.
Cease then thy offspring's death unjust to call;
Heroes as great have died, and yet shall fall.
Why should heaven's law with foolish man comply
Exempted from the race ordain'd to die?"

This menace fix'd the warrior to his throne;
Sullen he sat, and curb'd the rising groan.
Then Juno call'd (Jove's orders to obey)
The winged Iris, and the god of day.
"Go wait the Thunderer's will (Saturnia cried)
On yon tall summit of the fountful Ide:
There in the father's awful presence stand,
Receive, and execute his dread command."

She said, and sat; the god that gilds the day,
And various Iris, wing their airy way.
Swift as the wind, to Ida's hills they came,
(Fair nurse of fountains, and of savage game)
There sat the eternal; he whose nod controls
The trembling world, and shakes the steady poles.
Veil'd in a mist of fragrance him they found,
With clouds of gold and purple circled round.
Well-pleased the Thunderer saw their earnest care,
And prompt obedience to the queen of air;
Then (while a smile serenes his awful brow)
Commands the goddess of the showery bow:

"Iris! descend, and what we here ordain,
Report to yon mad tyrant of the main.
Bid him from fight to his own deeps repair,
Or breathe from slaughter in the fields of air.
If he refuse, then let him timely weigh
Our elder birthright, and superior sway.
How shall his rashness stand the dire alarms,
If heaven's omnipotence descend in arms?
Strives he with me, by whom his power was given,
And is there equal to the lord of heaven?"

The all-mighty spoke; the goddess wing'd her flight
To sacred Ilion from the Idaean height.
Swift as the rattling hail, or fleecy snows,
Drive through the skies, when Boreas fiercely blows;
So from the clouds descending Iris falls,
And to blue Neptune thus the goddess calls:

"Attend the mandate of the sire above!
In me behold the messenger of Jove:
He bids thee from forbidden wars repair
To thine own deeps, or to the fields of air.
This if refused, he bids thee timely weigh
His elder birthright, and superior sway.
How shall thy rashness stand the dire alarms
If heaven's omnipotence descend in arms?
Striv'st thou with him by whom all power is given?
And art thou equal to the lord of heaven?"

"What means the haughty sovereign of the skies?
(The king of ocean thus, incensed, replies;)
Rule as he will his portion'd realms on high;
No vassal god, nor of his train, am I.
Three brother deities from Saturn came,
And ancient Rhea, earth's immortal dame:
Assign'd by lot, our triple rule we know;
Infernal Pluto sways the shades below;
O'er the wide clouds, and o'er the starry plain,
Ethereal Jove extends his high domain;
My court beneath the hoary waves I keep,
And hush the roarings of the sacred deep;
Olympus, and this earth, in common lie:
What claim has here the tyrant of the sky?
Far in the distant clouds let him control,
And awe the younger brothers of the pole;
There to his children his commands be given,
The trembling, servile, second race of heaven."

"And must I then (said she), O sire of floods!
Bear this fierce answer to the king of gods?
Correct it yet, and change thy rash intent;
A noble mind disdains not to repent.
To elder brothers guardian fiends are given,
To scourge the wretch insulting them and heaven."

"Great is the profit (thus the god rejoin'd)
When ministers are blest with prudent mind:
Warn'd by thy words, to powerful Jove I yield,
And quit, though angry, the contended field:
Not but his threats with justice I disclaim,
The same our honours, and our birth the same.
If yet, forgetful of his promise given
To Hermes, Pallas, and the queen of heaven,
To favour Ilion, that perfidious place,
He breaks his faith with half the ethereal race;
Give him to know, unless the Grecian train
Lay yon proud structures level with the plain,
Howe'er the offence by other gods be pass'd,
The wrath of Neptune shall for ever last."

Thus speaking, furious from the field he strode,
And plunged into the bosom of the flood.
The lord of thunders, from his lofty height
Beheld, and thus bespoke the source of light:

"Behold! the god whose liquid arms are hurl'd
Around the globe, whose earthquakes rock the world,
Desists at length his rebel-war to wage,
Seeks his own seas, and trembles at our rage;
Else had my wrath, heaven's thrones all shaking round,
Burn'd to the bottom of his seas profound;
And all the gods that round old Saturn dwell
Had heard the thunders to the deeps of hell.
Well was the crime, and well the vengeance spared;
Even power immense had found such battle hard.
Go thou, my son! the trembling Greeks alarm,
Shake my broad aegis on thy active arm,
Be godlike Hector thy peculiar care,
Swell his bold heart, and urge his strength to war:
Let Ilion conquer, till the Achaian train
Fly to their ships and Hellespont again:
Then Greece shall breathe from toils." The godhead said;
His will divine the son of Jove obey'd.
Not half so swift the sailing falcon flies,
That drives a turtle through the liquid skies,
As Phoebus, shooting from the Idaean brow,
Glides down the mountain to the plain below.
There Hector seated by the stream he sees,
His sense returning with the coming breeze;
Again his pulses beat, his spirits rise;
Again his loved companions meet his eyes;
Jove thinking of his pains, they pass'd away,
To whom the god who gives the golden day:

"Why sits great Hector from the field so far?
What grief, what wound, withholds thee from the war?"

The fainting hero, as the vision bright
Stood shining o'er him, half unseal'd his sight:

"What blest immortal, with commanding breath,
Thus wakens Hector from the sleep of death?
Has fame not told, how, while my trusty sword
Bathed Greece in slaughter, and her battle gored,
The mighty Ajax with a deadly blow
Had almost sunk me to the shades below?
Even yet, methinks, the gliding ghosts I spy,
And hell's black horrors swim before my eye."

To him Apollo: "Be no more dismay'd;
See, and be strong! the Thunderer sends thee aid.
Behold! thy Phoebus shall his arms employ,
Phoebus, propitious still to thee and Troy.
Inspire thy warriors then with manly force,
And to the ships impel thy rapid horse:
Even I will make thy fiery coursers way,
And drive the Grecians headlong to the sea."

Thus to bold Hector spoke the son of Jove,
And breathed immortal ardour from above.
As when the pamper'd steed, with reins unbound,
Breaks from his stall, and pours along the ground;
With ample strokes he rushes to the flood,
To bathe his sides, and cool his fiery blood;
His head, now freed, he tosses to the skies;
His mane dishevell'd o'er his shoulders flies:
He snuffs the females in the well-known plain,
And springs, exulting, to his fields again:
Urged by the voice divine, thus Hector flew,
Full of the god; and all his hosts pursue.
As when the force of men and dogs combined
Invade the mountain goat, or branching hind;
Far from the hunter's rage secure they lie
Close in the rock, (not fated yet to die)
When lo! a lion shoots across the way!
They fly: at once the chasers and the prey.
So Greece, that late in conquering troops pursued,
And mark'd their progress through the ranks in blood,
Soon as they see the furious chief appear,
Forget to vanquish, and consent to fear.

Thoas with grief observed his dreadful course,
Thoas, the bravest of the tolian force;
Skill'd to direct the javelin's distant flight,
And bold to combat in the standing fight,
Not more in councils famed for solid sense,
Than winning words and heavenly eloquence.
"Gods! what portent (he cried) these eyes invades?
Lo! Hector rises from the Stygian shades!
We saw him, late, by thundering Ajax kill'd:
What god restores him to the frighted field;
And not content that half of Greece lie slain,
Pours new destruction on her sons again?
He comes not, Jove! without thy powerful will;
Lo! still he lives, pursues, and conquers still!
Yet hear my counsel, and his worst withstand:
The Greeks' main body to the fleet command;
But let the few whom brisker spirits warm,
Stand the first onset, and provoke the storm.
Thus point your arms; and when such foes appear,
Fierce as he is, let Hector learn to fear."

The warrior spoke; the listening Greeks obey,
Thickening their ranks, and form a deep array.

Each Ajax, Teucer, Merion gave command,
The valiant leader of the Cretan band;
And Mars-like Meges: these the chiefs excite,
Approach the foe, and meet the coming fight.
Behind, unnumber'd multitudes attend,
To flank the navy, and the shores defend.
Full on the front the pressing Trojans bear,
And Hector first came towering to the war.
Phoebus himself the rushing battle led;
A veil of clouds involved his radiant head:
High held before him, Jove's enormous shield
Portentous shone, and shaded all the field;
Vulcan to Jove the immortal gift consign'd,
To scatter hosts and terrify mankind,
The Greeks expect the shock, the clamours rise
From different parts, and mingle in the skies.
Dire was the hiss of darts, by heroes flung,
And arrows leaping from the bow-string sung;
These drink the life of generous warriors slain:
Those guiltless fall, and thirst for blood in vain.
As long as Phoebus bore unmoved the shield,
Sat doubtful conquest hovering o'er the field;
But when aloft he shakes it in the skies,
Shouts in their ears, and lightens in their eyes,
Deep horror seizes every Grecian breast,
Their force is humbled, and their fear confess'd.
So flies a herd of oxen, scatter'd wide,
No swain to guard them, and no day to guide,
When two fell lions from the mountain come,
And spread the carnage through the shady gloom.
Impending Phoebus pours around them fear,
And Troy and Hector thunder in the rear.
Heaps fall on heaps: the slaughter Hector leads,
First great Arcesilas, then Stichius bleeds;
One to the bold Boeotians ever dear,
And one Menestheus' friend and famed compeer.
Medon and Iasus, neas sped;
This sprang from Phelus, and the Athenians led;
But hapless Medon from Oileus came;
Him Ajax honour'd with a brother's name,
Though born of lawless love: from home expell'd,
A banish'd man, in Phylace he dwell'd,
Press'd by the vengeance of an angry wife;
Troy ends at last his labours and his life.
Mecystes next Polydamas o'erthrew;
And thee, brave Clonius, great Agenor slew.
By Paris, Deiochus inglorious dies,
Pierced through the shoulder as he basely flies.
Polites' arm laid Echius on the plain;
Stretch'd on one heap, the victors spoil the slain.
The Greeks dismay'd, confused, disperse or fall,
Some seek the trench, some skulk behind the wall.
While these fly trembling, others pant for breath,
And o'er the slaughter stalks gigantic death.
On rush'd bold Hector, gloomy as the night;
Forbids to plunder, animates the fight,
Points to the fleet: "For, by the gods! who flies,
Who dares but linger, by this hand he dies;
No weeping sister his cold eye shall close,
No friendly hand his funeral pyre compose.
Who stops to plunder at this signal hour,
The birds shall tear him, and the dogs devour."
Furious he said; the smarting scourge resounds;
The coursers fly; the smoking chariot bounds;
The hosts rush on; loud clamours shake the shore;
The horses thunder, earth and ocean roar!
Apollo, planted at the trench's bound,
Push'd at the bank: down sank the enormous mound:
Roll'd in the ditch the heapy ruin lay;
A sudden road! a long and ample way.
O'er the dread fosse (a late impervious space)
Now steeds, and men, and cars tumultuous pass.
The wondering crowds the downward level trod;
Before them flamed the shield, and march'd the god.
Then with his hand he shook the mighty wall;
And lo! the turrets nod, the bulwarks fall:
Easy as when ashore an infant stands,
And draws imagined houses in the sands;
The sportive wanton, pleased with some new play,
Sweeps the slight works and fashion'd domes away:
Thus vanish'd at thy touch, the towers and walls;
The toil of thousands in a moment falls.

The Grecians gaze around with wild despair,
Confused, and weary all the powers with prayer:
Exhort their men, with praises, threats, commands;
And urge the gods, with voices, eyes, and hands.
Experienced Nestor chief obtests the skies,
And weeps his country with a father's eyes.

"O Jove! if ever, on his native shore,
One Greek enrich'd thy shrine with offer'd gore;
If e'er, in hope our country to behold,
We paid the fattest firstlings of the fold;
If e'er thou sign'st our wishes with thy nod:
Perform the promise of a gracious god!
This day preserve our navies from the flame,
And save the relics of the Grecian name."

Thus prayed the sage: the eternal gave consent,
And peals of thunder shook the firmament.
Presumptuous Troy mistook the accepting sign,
And catch'd new fury at the voice divine.
As, when black tempests mix the seas and skies,
The roaring deeps in watery mountains rise,
Above the sides of some tall ship ascend,
Its womb they deluge, and its ribs they rend:
Thus loudly roaring, and o'erpowering all,
Mount the thick Trojans up the Grecian wall;
Legions on legions from each side arise:
Thick sound the keels; the storm of arrows flies.
Fierce on the ships above, the cars below,
These wield the mace, and those the javelin throw.

While thus the thunder of the battle raged,
And labouring armies round the works engaged,
Still in the tent Patroclus sat to tend
The good Eurypylus, his wounded friend.
He sprinkles healing balms, to anguish kind,
And adds discourse, the medicine of the mind.
But when he saw, ascending up the fleet,
Victorious Troy; then, starting from his seat,
With bitter groans his sorrows he express'd,
He wrings his hands, he beats his manly breast.
"Though yet thy state require redress (he cries)
Depart I must: what horrors strike my eyes!
Charged with Achilles' high command I go,
A mournful witness of this scene of woe;
I haste to urge him by his country's care
To rise in arms, and shine again in war.
Perhaps some favouring god his soul may bend;
The voice is powerful of a faithful friend."

He spoke; and, speaking, swifter than the wind
Sprung from the tent, and left the war behind.
The embodied Greeks the fierce attack sustain,
But strive, though numerous, to repulse in vain:
Nor could the Trojans, through that firm array,
Force to the fleet and tents the impervious way.
As when a shipwright, with Palladian art,
Smooths the rough wood, and levels every part;
With equal hand he guides his whole design,
By the just rule, and the directing line:
The martial leaders, with like skill and care,
Preserved their line, and equal kept the war.
Brave deeds of arms through all the ranks were tried,
And every ship sustained an equal tide.
At one proud bark, high-towering o'er the fleet,
Ajax the great, and godlike Hector meet;
For one bright prize the matchless chiefs contend,
Nor this the ships can fire, nor that defend:
One kept the shore, and one the vessel trod;
That fix'd as fate, this acted by a god.
The son of Clytius in his daring hand,
The deck approaching, shakes a flaming brand;
But, pierced by Telamon's huge lance, expires:
Thundering he falls, and drops the extinguish'd fires.
Great Hector view'd him with a sad survey,
As stretch'd in dust before the stern he lay.
"Oh! all of Trojan, all of Lycian race!
Stand to your arms, maintain this arduous space:
Lo! where the son of royal Clytius lies;
Ah, save his arms, secure his obsequies!"

This said, his eager javelin sought the foe:
But Ajax shunn'd the meditated blow.
Not vainly yet the forceful lance was thrown;
It stretch'd in dust unhappy Lycophron:
An exile long, sustain'd at Ajax' board,
A faithful servant to a foreign lord;
In peace, and war, for ever at his side,
Near his loved master, as he lived, he died.
From the high poop he tumbles on the sand,
And lies a lifeless load along the land.
With anguish Ajax views the piercing sight,
And thus inflames his brother to the fight:

"Teucer, behold! extended on the shore
Our friend, our loved companion! now no more!
Dear as a parent, with a parent's care
To fight our wars he left his native air.
This death deplored, to Hector's rage we owe;
Revenge, revenge it on the cruel foe.
Where are those darts on which the fates attend?
And where the bow which Phoebus taught to bend?"

Impatient Teucer, hastening to his aid,
Before the chief his ample bow display'd;
The well-stored quiver on his shoulders hung:
Then hiss'd his arrow, and the bowstring sung.
Clytus, Pisenor's son, renown'd in fame,
(To thee, Polydamas! an honour'd name)
Drove through the thickest of the embattled plains
The startling steeds, and shook his eager reins.
As all on glory ran his ardent mind,
The pointed death arrests him from behind:
Through his fair neck the thrilling arrow flies;
In youth's first bloom reluctantly he dies.
Hurl'd from the lofty seat, at distance far,
The headlong coursers spurn his empty car;
Till sad Polydamas the steeds restrain'd,
And gave, Astynous, to thy careful hand;
Then, fired to vengeance, rush'd amidst the foe:
Rage edged his sword, and strengthen'd every blow.

Once more bold Teucer, in his country's cause,
At Hector's breast a chosen arrow draws:
And had the weapon found the destined way,
Thy fall, great Trojan! had renown'd that day.
But Hector was not doom'd to perish then:
The all-wise disposer of the fates of men
(Imperial Jove) his present death withstands;
Nor was such glory due to Teucer's hands.
At its full stretch as the tough string he drew,
Struck by an arm unseen, it burst in two;
Down dropp'd the bow: the shaft with brazen head
Fell innocent, and on the dust lay dead.
The astonish'd archer to great Ajax cries;
"Some god prevents our destined enterprise:
Some god, propitious to the Trojan foe,
Has, from my arm unfailing, struck the bow,
And broke the nerve my hands had twined with art,
Strong to impel the flight of many a dart."

"Since heaven commands it (Ajax made reply)
Dismiss the bow, and lay thy arrows by:
Thy arms no less suffice the lance to wield,
And quit the quiver for the ponderous shield.
In the first ranks indulge thy thirst of fame,
Thy brave example shall the rest inflame.
Fierce as they are, by long successes vain;
To force our fleet, or even a ship to gain,
Asks toil, and sweat, and blood: their utmost might
Shall find its match--No more: 'tis ours to fight."

Then Teucer laid his faithless bow aside;
The fourfold buckler o'er his shoulder tied;
On his brave head a crested helm he placed,
With nodding horse-hair formidably graced;
A dart, whose point with brass refulgent shines,
The warrior wields; and his great brother joins.

This Hector saw, and thus express'd his joy:
"Ye troops of Lycia, Dardanus, and Troy!
Be mindful of yourselves, your ancient fame,
And spread your glory with the navy's flame.
Jove is with us; I saw his hand, but now,
From the proud archer strike his vaunted bow:
Indulgent Jove! how plain thy favours shine,
When happy nations bear the marks divine!
How easy then, to see the sinking state
Of realms accursed, deserted, reprobate!
Such is the fate of Greece, and such is ours:
Behold, ye warriors, and exert your powers.
Death is the worst; a fate which all must try;
And for our country, 'tis a bliss to die.
The gallant man, though slain in fight he be,
Yet leaves his nation safe, his children free;
Entails a debt on all the grateful state;
His own brave friends shall glory in his fate;
His wife live honour'd, all his race succeed,
And late posterity enjoy the deed!"

This roused the soul in every Trojan breast:
The godlike Ajax next his Greeks address'd:

"How long, ye warriors of the Argive race,
(To generous Argos what a dire disgrace!)
How long on these cursed confines will ye lie,
Yet undetermined, or to live or die?
What hopes remain, what methods to retire,
If once your vessels catch the Trojan fire?
Make how the flames approach, how near they fall,
How Hector calls, and Troy obeys his call!
Not to the dance that dreadful voice invites,
It calls to death, and all the rage of fights.
'Tis now no time for wisdom or debates;
To your own hands are trusted all your fates;
And better far in one decisive strife,
One day should end our labour or our life,
Than keep this hard-got inch of barren sands,
Still press'd, and press'd by such inglorious hands."

The listening Grecians feel their leader's flame,
And every kindling bosom pants for fame.
Then mutual slaughters spread on either side;
By Hector here the Phocian Schedius died;
There, pierced by Ajax, sunk Laodamas,
Chief of the foot, of old Antenor's race.
Polydamas laid Otus on the sand,
The fierce commander of the Epeian band.
His lance bold Meges at the victor threw;
The victor, stooping, from the death withdrew;
(That valued life, O Phoebus! was thy care)
But Croesmus' bosom took the flying spear:
His corpse fell bleeding on the slippery shore;
His radiant arms triumphant Meges bore.
Dolops, the son of Lampus, rushes on,
Sprung from the race of old Laomedon,
And famed for prowess in a well-fought field,
He pierced the centre of his sounding shield:
But Meges, Phyleus' ample breastplate wore,
(Well-known in fight on Selle's winding shore;
For king Euphetes gave the golden mail,
Compact, and firm with many a jointed scale)
Which oft, in cities storm'd, and battles won,
Had saved the father, and now saves the son.
Full at the Trojan's head he urged his lance,
Where the high plumes above the helmet dance,
New ting'd with Tyrian dye: in dust below,
Shorn from the crest, the purple honours glow.
Meantime their fight the Spartan king survey'd,
And stood by Meges' side a sudden aid.
Through Dolops' shoulder urged his forceful dart,
Which held its passage through the panting heart,
And issued at his breast. With thundering sound
The warrior falls, extended on the ground.
In rush the conquering Greeks to spoil the slain:
But Hector's voice excites his kindred train;
The hero most, from Hicetaon sprung,
Fierce Melanippus, gallant, brave, and young.
He (ere to Troy the Grecians cross'd the main)
Fed his large oxen on Percote's plain;
But when oppress'd, his country claim'd his care,
Return'd to Ilion, and excell'd in war;
For this, in Priam's court, he held his place,
Beloved no less than Priam's royal race.
Him Hector singled, as his troops he led,
And thus inflamed him, pointing to the dead.

"Lo, Melanippus! lo, where Dolops lies;
And is it thus our royal kinsman dies?
O'ermatch'd he falls; to two at once a prey,
And lo! they bear the bloody arms away!
Come on--a distant war no longer wage,
But hand to hand thy country's foes engage:
Till Greece at once, and all her glory end;
Or Ilion from her towery height descend,
Heaved from the lowest stone; and bury all
In one sad sepulchre, one common fall."

Hector (this said) rush'd forward on the foes:
With equal ardour Melanippus glows:
Then Ajax thus--"O Greeks! respect your fame,
Respect yourselves, and learn an honest shame:
Let mutual reverence mutual warmth inspire,
And catch from breast to breast the noble fire,
On valour's side the odds of combat lie;
The brave live glorious, or lamented die;
The wretch that trembles in the field of fame,
Meets death, and worse than death, eternal shame."

His generous sense he not in vain imparts;
It sunk, and rooted in the Grecian hearts:
They join, they throng, they thicken at his call,
And flank the navy with a brazen wall;
Shields touching shields, in order blaze above,
And stop the Trojans, though impell'd by Jove.
The fiery Spartan first, with loud applause.
Warms the bold son of Nestor in his cause.
"Is there (he said) in arms a youth like you,
So strong to fight, so active to pursue?
Why stand you distant, nor attempt a deed?
Lift the bold lance, and make some Trojan bleed."

He said; and backward to the lines retired;
Forth rush'd the youth with martial fury fired,
Beyond the foremost ranks; his lance he threw,
And round the black battalions cast his view.
The troops of Troy recede with sudden fear,
While the swift javelin hiss'd along in air.
Advancing Melanippus met the dart
With his bold breast, and felt it in his heart:
Thundering he falls; his falling arms resound,
And his broad buckler rings against the ground.
The victor leaps upon his prostrate prize:
Thus on a roe the well-breath'd beagle flies,
And rends his side, fresh-bleeding with the dart
The distant hunter sent into his heart.
Observing Hector to the rescue flew;
Bold as he was, Antilochus withdrew.
So when a savage, ranging o'er the plain,
Has torn the shepherd's dog, or shepherd's swain,
While conscious of the deed, he glares around,
And hears the gathering multitude resound,
Timely he flies the yet-untasted food,
And gains the friendly shelter of the wood:
So fears the youth; all Troy with shouts pursue,
While stones and darts in mingled tempest flew;
But enter'd in the Grecian ranks, he turns
His manly breast, and with new fury burns.

Now on the fleet the tides of Trojans drove,
Fierce to fulfil the stern decrees of Jove:
The sire of gods, confirming Thetis' prayer,
The Grecian ardour quench'd in deep despair;
But lifts to glory Troy's prevailing bands,
Swells all their hearts, and strengthens all their hands.
On Ida's top he waits with longing eyes,
To view the navy blazing to the skies;
Then, nor till then, the scale of war shall turn,
The Trojans fly, and conquer'd Ilion burn.
These fates revolved in his almighty mind,
He raises Hector to the work design'd,
Bids him with more than mortal fury glow,
And drives him, like a lightning, on the foe.
So Mars, when human crimes for vengeance call,
Shakes his huge javelin, and whole armies fall.
Not with more rage a conflagration rolls,
Wraps the vast mountains, and involves the poles.
He foams with wrath; beneath his gloomy brow
Like fiery meteors his red eye-balls glow:
The radiant helmet on his temple burns,
Waves when he nods, and lightens as he turns:
For Jove his splendour round the chief had thrown,
And cast the blaze of both the hosts on one.
Unhappy glories! for his fate was near,
Due to stern Pallas, and Pelides' spear:
Yet Jove deferr'd the death he was to pay,
And gave what fate allow'd, the honours of a day!

Now all on fire for fame, his breast, his eyes
Burn at each foe, and single every prize;
Still at the closest ranks, the thickest fight,
He points his ardour, and exerts his might.
The Grecian phalanx, moveless as a tower,
On all sides batter'd, yet resists his power:
So some tall rock o'erhangs the hoary main,
By winds assail'd, by billows beat in vain,
Unmoved it hears, above, the tempest blow,
And sees the watery mountains break below.
Girt in surrounding flames, he seems to fall
Like fire from Jove, and bursts upon them all:
Bursts as a wave that from the cloud impends,
And, swell'd with tempests, on the ship descends;
White are the decks with foam; the winds aloud
Howl o'er the masts, and sing through every shroud:
Pale, trembling, tired, the sailors freeze with fears;
And instant death on every wave appears.
So pale the Greeks the eyes of Hector meet,
The chief so thunders, and so shakes the fleet.

As when a lion, rushing from his den,
Amidst the plain of some wide-water'd fen,
(Where numerous oxen, as at ease they feed,
At large expatiate o'er the ranker mead)
Leaps on the herds before the herdsman's eyes;
The trembling herdsman far to distance flies;
Some lordly bull (the rest dispersed and fled)
He singles out; arrests, and lays him dead.
Thus from the rage of Jove-like Hector flew
All Greece in heaps; but one he seized, and slew:
Mycenian Periphes, a mighty name,
In wisdom great, in arms well known to fame;
The minister of stern Eurystheus' ire
Against Alcides, Copreus was his sire:
The son redeem'd the honours of the race,
A son as generous as the sire was base;
O'er all his country's youth conspicuous far
In every virtue, or of peace or war:
But doom'd to Hector's stronger force to yield!
Against the margin of his ample shield
He struck his hasty foot: his heels up-sprung;
Supine he fell; his brazen helmet rung.
On the fallen chief the invading Trojan press'd,
And plunged the pointed javelin in his breast.
His circling friends, who strove to guard too late
The unhappy hero, fled, or shared his fate.

Chased from the foremost line, the Grecian train
Now man the next, receding toward the main:
Wedged in one body at the tents they stand,
Wall'd round with sterns, a gloomy, desperate band.
Now manly shame forbids the inglorious flight;
Now fear itself confines them to the fight:
Man courage breathes in man; but Nestor most
(The sage preserver of the Grecian host)
Exhorts, adjures, to guard these utmost shores;
And by their parents, by themselves implores.

"Oh friends! be men: your generous breasts inflame
With mutual honour, and with mutual shame!
Think of your hopes, your fortunes; all the care
Your wives, your infants, and your parents share:
Think of each living father's reverend head;
Think of each ancestor with glory dead;
Absent, by me they speak, by me they sue,
They ask their safety, and their fame, from you:
The gods their fates on this one action lay,
And all are lost, if you desert the day."

He spoke, and round him breathed heroic fires;
Minerva seconds what the sage inspires.
The mist of darkness Jove around them threw
She clear'd, restoring all the war to view;
A sudden ray shot beaming o'er the plain,
And show'd the shores, the navy, and the main:
Hector they saw, and all who fly, or fight,
The scene wide-opening to the blaze of light,
First of the field great Ajax strikes their eyes,
His port majestic, and his ample size:
A ponderous mace with studs of iron crown'd,
Full twenty cubits long, he swings around;
Nor fights, like others, fix'd to certain stands
But looks a moving tower above the bands;
High on the decks with vast gigantic stride,
The godlike hero stalks from side to side.
So when a horseman from the watery mead
(Skill'd in the manage of the bounding steed)
Drives four fair coursers, practised to obey,
To some great city through the public way;
Safe in his art, as side by side they run,
He shifts his seat, and vaults from one to one;
And now to this, and now to that he flies;
Admiring numbers follow with their eyes.

From ship to ship thus Ajax swiftly flew,
No less the wonder of the warring crew.
As furious, Hector thunder'd threats aloud,
And rush'd enraged before the Trojan crowd;
Then swift invades the ships, whose beaky prores
Lay rank'd contiguous on the bending shores;
So the strong eagle from his airy height,
Who marks the swans' or cranes' embodied flight,
Stoops down impetuous, while they light for food,
And, stooping, darkens with his wings the flood.
Jove leads him on with his almighty hand,
And breathes fierce spirits in his following band.
The warring nations meet, the battle roars,
Thick beats the combat on the sounding prores.
Thou wouldst have thought, so furious was their fire,
No force could tame them, and no toil could tire;
As if new vigour from new fights they won,
And the long battle was but then begun.
Greece, yet unconquer'd, kept alive the war,
Secure of death, confiding in despair:
Troy in proud hopes already view'd the main
Bright with the blaze, and red with heroes slain:
Like strength is felt from hope, and from despair,
And each contends, as his were all the war.

"Twas thou, bold Hector! whose resistless hand
First seized a ship on that contested strand;
The same which dead Protesilaus bore,
The first that touch'd the unhappy Trojan shore:
For this in arms the warring nations stood,
And bathed their generous breasts with mutual blood.
No room to poise the lance or bend the bow;
But hand to hand, and man to man, they grow:
Wounded, they wound; and seek each other's hearts
With falchions, axes, swords, and shorten'd darts.
The falchions ring, shields rattle, axes sound,
Swords flash in air, or glitter on the ground;
With streaming blood the slippery shores are dyed,
And slaughter'd heroes swell the dreadful tide.

Still raging, Hector with his ample hand
Grasps the high stern, and gives this loud command:

"Haste, bring the flames! that toil of ten long years
Is finished; and the day desired appears!
This happy day with acclamations greet,
Bright with destruction of yon hostile fleet.
The coward-counsels of a timorous throng
Of reverend dotards check'd our glory long:
Too long Jove lull'd us with lethargic charms,
But now in peals of thunder calls to arms:
In this great day he crowns our full desires,
Wakes all our force, and seconds all our fires."

He spoke--the warriors at his fierce command
Pour a new deluge on the Grecian band.
Even Ajax paused, (so thick the javelins fly,)
Stepp'd back, and doubted or to live or die.
Yet, where the oars are placed, he stands to wait
What chief approaching dares attempt his fate:
Even to the last his naval charge defends,
Now shakes his spear, now lifts, and now protends;
Even yet, the Greeks with piercing shouts inspires,
Amidst attacks, and deaths, and darts, and fires.

"O friends! O heroes! names for ever dear,
Once sons of Mars, and thunderbolts of war!
Ah! yet be mindful of your old renown,
Your great forefathers' virtues and your own.
What aids expect you in this utmost strait?
What bulwarks rising between you and fate?
No aids, no bulwarks your retreat attend,
No friends to help, no city to defend.
This spot is all you have, to lose or keep;
There stand the Trojans, and here rolls the deep.
'Tis hostile ground you tread; your native lands
Far, far from hence: your fates are in your hands."

Raging he spoke; nor further wastes his breath,
But turns his javelin to the work of death.
Whate'er bold Trojan arm'd his daring hands,
Against the sable ships, with flaming brands,
So well the chief his naval weapon sped,
The luckless warrior at his stern lay dead:
Full twelve, the boldest, in a moment fell,
Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell.

So warr'd both armies on the ensanguined shore,
While the black vessels smoked with human gore.
Meantime Patroclus to Achilles flies;
The streaming tears fall copious from his eyes
Not faster, trickling to the plains below,
From the tall rock the sable waters flow.
Divine Pelides, with compassion moved.
Thus spoke, indulgent, to his best beloved:

"Patroclus, say, what grief thy bosom bears,
That flows so fast in these unmanly tears?
No girl, no infant whom the mother keeps
From her loved breast, with fonder passion weeps;
Not more the mother's soul, that infant warms,
Clung to her knees, and reaching at her arms,
Than thou hast mine! Oh tell me, to what end
Thy melting sorrows thus pursue thy friend?

"Griev'st thou for me, or for, my martial band?
Or come sad tidings from our native land?
Our fathers live (our first, most tender care),
Thy good Menoetius breathes the vital air,
And hoary Peleus yet extends his days;
Pleased in their age to hear their children's praise.
Or may some meaner cause thy pity claim?
Perhaps yon relics of the Grecian name,
Doom'd in their ships to sink by fire and sword,
And pay the forfeit of their haughty lord?
Whate'er the cause, reveal thy secret care,
And speak those sorrows which a friend would share."
A sigh that instant from his bosom broke,
Another follow'd, and Patroclus spoke:

"Let Greece at length with pity touch thy breast,
Thyself a Greek; and, once, of Greeks the best!
Lo! every chief that might her fate prevent,
Lies pierced with wounds, and bleeding in his tent:
Eurypylus, Tydides, Atreus' son,
And wise Ulysses, at the navy groan,
More for their country's wounds than for their own.
Their pain soft arts of pharmacy can ease,
Thy breast alone no lenitives appease.
May never rage like thine my soul enslave,
O great in vain! unprofitably brave!
Thy country slighted in her last distress,
What friend, what man, from thee shall hope redress?
No--men unborn, and ages yet behind,
Shall curse that fierce, that unforgiving mind.

"O man unpitying! if of man thy race;
But sure thou spring'st not from a soft embrace,
Nor ever amorous hero caused thy birth,
Nor ever tender goddess brought thee forth:
Some rugged rock's hard entrails gave thee form,
And raging seas produced thee in a storm,
A soul well suiting that tempestuous kind,
So rough thy manners, so untamed thy mind.

"If some dire oracle thy breast alarm,
If aught from Jove, or Thetis, stop thy arm,
Some beam of comfort yet on Greece may shine,
If I but lead the Myrmidonian line:
Clad in thy dreadful arms if I appear,
Proud Troy shall tremble, and desert the war;
Without thy person Greece shall win the day,
And thy mere image chase her foes away.
Press'd by fresh forces, her o'erlabour'd train
Shall quit the ships, and Greece respire again."
Thus, blind to fate! with supplicating breath,
Thou begg'st his arms, and in his arms thy death.
Unfortunately good! a boding sigh
Thy friend return'd; and with it, this reply:
"Patroclus! thy Achilles knows no fears;
Nor words from Jove nor oracles he hears;
Nor aught a mother's caution can suggest;
The tyrant's pride lies rooted in my breast.
My wrongs, my wrongs, my constant thought engage,
Those, my sole oracles, inspire my rage:
I made him tyrant: gave him power to wrong
Even my: I felt it; and shall feel it long.
The maid, my black-eyed maid, he forced away,
Due to the toils of many a well-fought day;
Due to my conquest of her father's reign;
Due to the votes of all the Grecian train.
From me he forced her; me, the bold and brave,
Disgraced, dishonour'd, like the meanest slave.
But bear we this--the wrongs I grieve are past;
'Tis time our fury should relent at last:
I fix'd its date; the day I wish'd appears:
How Hector to my ships his battle bears,
The flames my eyes, the shouts invade my ears.
Go then, Patroclus! court fair honour's charms
In Troy's famed fields, and in Achilles' arms:
Lead forth my martial Myrmidons to fight,
Go save the fleets, and conquer in my right.
See the thin relics of their baffled band
At the last edge of yon deserted land!
Behold all Ilion on their ships descends;
How the cloud blackens, how the storm impends!
It was not thus, when, at my sight amazed,
Troy saw and trembled, as this helmet blazed:
Had not the injurious king our friendship lost,
Yon ample trench had buried half her host.
No camps, no bulwarks now the Trojans fear,
Those are not dreadful, no Achilles there;
No longer flames the lance of Tydeus' son;
No more your general calls his heroes on:
Hector, alone, I hear; his dreadful breath
Commands your slaughter, or proclaims your death.
Yet now, Patroclus, issue to the plain:
Now save the ships, the rising fires restrain,
And give the Greeks to visit Greece again.
But heed my words, and mark a friend's command,
Who trusts his fame and honours in thy hand,
And from thy deeds expects the Achaian host
Shall render back the beauteous maid he lost:
Rage uncontroll'd through all the hostile crew,
But touch not Hector, Hector is my due.
Though Jove in thunder should command the war,
Be just, consult my glory, and forbear.
The fleet once saved, desist from further chase,
Nor lead to Ilion's walls the Grecian race;
Some adverse god thy rashness may destroy;
Some god, like Phoebus, ever kind to Troy.
Let Greece, redeem'd from this destructive strait,
Do her own work; and leave the rest to fate.
O! would to all the immortal powers above,
Apollo, Pallas, and almighty Jove!
That not one Trojan might be left alive,
And not a Greek of all the race survive:
Might only we the vast destruction shun,
And only we destroy the accursed town!"
Such conference held the chiefs; while on the strand
Great Jove with conquest crown'd the Trojan band.
Ajax no more the sounding storm sustain'd,
So thick the darts an iron tempest rain'd:
On his tired arm the weighty buckler hung;
His hollow helm with falling javelins rung;
His breath, in quick short pantings, comes and goes;
And painful sweat from all his members flows.
Spent and o'erpower'd, he barely breathes at most;
Yet scarce an army stirs him from his post;
Dangers on dangers all around him glow,
And toil to toil, and woe succeeds to woe.

Say, Muses, throned above the starry frame,
How first the navy blazed with Trojan flame?

Stern Hector waved his sword, and standing near,
Where furious Ajax plied his ashen spear,
Full on the lance a stroke so justly sped,
That the broad falchion lopp'd its brazen head;
His pointless spear the warrior shakes in vain;
The brazen head falls sounding on the plain.
Great Ajax saw, and own'd the hand divine;
Confessing Jove, and trembling at the sign,
Warn'd he retreats. Then swift from all sides pour
The hissing brands; thick streams the fiery shower;
O'er the high stern the curling volumes rise,
And sheets of rolling smoke involve the skies.

Divine Achilles view'd the rising flames,
And smote his thigh, and thus aloud exclaims:
"Arm, arm, Patroclus! Lo, the blaze aspires!
The glowing ocean reddens with the fires.
Arm, ere our vessels catch the spreading flame;
Arm, ere the Grecians be no more a name;
I haste to bring the troops."--The hero said;
The friend with ardour and with joy obey'd.

He cased his limbs in brass; and first around
His manly legs, with silver buckles bound
The clasping greaves; then to his breast applies
The flaming cuirass of a thousand dyes;
Emblazed with studs of gold his falchion shone
In the rich belt, as in a starry zone:
Achilles' shield his ample shoulders spread,
Achilles' helmet nodded o'er his head:
Adorn'd in all his terrible array,
He flash'd around intolerable day.
Alone untouch'd, Pelides' javelin stands,
Not to be poised but by Pelides' hands:
From Pelion's shady brow the plant entire
Old Chiron rent, and shaped it for his sire;
Whose son's great arm alone the weapon wields,
The death of heroes, and the dread of fields.

The brave Automedon (an honour'd name,
The second to his lord in love and fame,
In peace his friend, and partner of the war)
The winged coursers harness'd to the car;
Xanthus and Balius, of immortal breed,
Sprung from the wind, and like the wind in speed.
Whom the wing'd harpy, swift Podarge, bore,
By Zephyr pregnant on the breezy shore:
Swift Pedasus was added to their side,
(Once great Aetion's, now Achilles' pride)
Who, like in strength, in swiftness, and in grace,
A mortal courser match'd the immortal race.

Achilles speeds from tent to tent, and warms
His hardy Myrmidons to blood and arms.
All breathing death, around the chief they stand,
A grim, terrific, formidable band:
Grim as voracious wolves, that seek the springs
When scalding thirst their burning bowels wrings;
When some tall stag, fresh-slaughtered in the wood,
Has drench'd their wide insatiate throats with blood,
To the black fount they rush, a hideous throng,
With paunch distended, and with lolling tongue,
Fire fills their eye, their black jaws belch the gore,
And gorged with slaughter still they thirst for more.
Like furious, rush'd the Myrmidonian crew,
Such their dread strength, and such their deathful view.

High in the midst the great Achilles stands,
Directs their order, and the war commands.
He, loved of Jove, had launch'd for Ilion's shores
Full fifty vessels, mann'd with fifty oars:
Five chosen leaders the fierce bands obey,
Himself supreme in valour, as in sway.

First march'd Menestheus, of celestial birth,
Derived from thee, whose waters wash the earth,
Divine Sperchius! Jove-descended flood!
A mortal mother mixing with a god.
Such was Menestheus, but miscall'd by fame
The son of Borus, that espoused the dame.

Eudorus next; whom Polymele the gay,
Famed in the graceful dance, produced to-day.
Her, sly Cellenius loved: on her would gaze,
As with swift step she form'd the running maze:
To her high chamber from Diana's quire,
The god pursued her, urged, and crown'd his fire.
The son confess'd his father's heavenly race,
And heir'd his mother's swiftness in the chase.
Strong Echecleus, bless'd in all those charms
That pleased a god, succeeded to her arms;
Not conscious of those loves, long hid from fame,
With gifts of price he sought and won the dame;
Her secret offspring to her sire she bare;
Her sire caress'd him with a parent's care.

Pisander follow'd; matchless in his art
To wing the spear, or aim the distant dart;
No hand so sure of all the Emathian line,
Or if a surer, great Patroclus! thine.

The fourth by Phoenix' grave command was graced,
Laerces' valiant offspring led the last.

Soon as Achilles with superior care
Had call'd the chiefs, and order'd all the war,
This stern remembrance to his troops he gave:
"Ye far-famed Myrmidons, ye fierce and brave!
Think with what threats you dared the Trojan throng,
Think what reproach these ears endured so long;
'Stern son of Peleus, (thus ye used to say,
While restless, raging, in your ships you lay)
Oh nursed with gall, unknowing how to yield;
Whose rage defrauds us of so famed a field:
If that dire fury must for ever burn,
What make we here? Return, ye chiefs, return!'
Such were your words--Now, warriors! grieve no more,
Lo there the Trojans; bathe your swords in gore!
This day shall give you all your soul demands,
Glut all your hearts, and weary all your hands!"

Thus while he roused the fire in every breast,
Close and more close the listening cohorts press'd;
Ranks wedged in ranks; of arms a steely ring
Still grows, and spreads, and thickens round the king.
As when a circling wall the builder forms,
Of strength defensive against wind and storms,
Compacted stones the thickening work compose,
And round him wide the rising structure grows:
So helm to helm, and crest to crest they throng,
Shield urged on shield, and man drove man along;
Thick, undistinguish'd plumes, together join'd,
Float in one sea, and wave before the wind.

Far o'er the rest in glittering pomp appear,
There bold Automedon, Patroclus here;
Brothers in arms, with equal fury fired;
Two friends, two bodies with one soul inspired.

But mindful of the gods, Achilles went
To the rich coffer in his shady tent;
There lay on heaps his various garments roll'd,
And costly furs, and carpets stiff with gold,
(The presents of the silver-footed dame)
From thence he took a bowl, of antique frame,
Which never man had stained with ruddy wine,
Nor raised in offerings to the power divine,
But Peleus' son; and Peleus' son to none
Had raised in offerings, but to Jove alone.
This tinged with sulphur, sacred first to flame,
He purged; and wash'd it in the running stream.
Then cleansed his hands; and fixing for a space
His eyes on heaven, his feet upon the place
Of sacrifice, the purple draught he pour'd
Forth in the midst; and thus the god implored:

"O thou supreme! high-throned all height above!
O great Pelasgic, Dodonaean Jove!
Who 'midst surrounding frosts, and vapours chill,
Presid'st on bleak Dodona's vocal hill:
(Whose groves the Selli, race austere! surround,
Their feet unwash'd, their slumbers on the ground;
Who hear, from rustling oaks, thy dark decrees;
And catch the fates, low-whispered in the breeze;)
Hear, as of old! Thou gav'st, at Thetis' prayer,
Glory to me, and to the Greeks despair.
Lo, to the dangers of the fighting field
The best, the dearest of my friends, I yield,
Though still determined, to my ships confined;
Patroclus gone, I stay but half behind.
Oh! be his guard thy providential care,
Confirm his heart, and string his arm to war:
Press'd by his single force let Hector see
His fame in arms not owing all to me.
But when the fleets are saved from foes and fire,
Let him with conquest and renown retire;
Preserve his arms, preserve his social train,
And safe return him to these eyes again!"

Great Jove consents to half the chief's request,
But heaven's eternal doom denies the rest;
To free the fleet was granted to his prayer;
His safe return, the winds dispersed in air.
Back to his tent the stern Achilles flies,
And waits the combat with impatient eyes.

Meanwhile the troops beneath Patroclus' care,
Invade the Trojans, and commence the war.
As wasps, provoked by children in their play,
Pour from their mansions by the broad highway,
In swarms the guiltless traveller engage,
Whet all their stings, and call forth all their rage:
All rise in arms, and, with a general cry,
Assert their waxen domes, and buzzing progeny.
Thus from the tents the fervent legion swarms,
So loud their clamours, and so keen their arms:
Their rising rage Patroclus' breath inspires,
Who thus inflames them with heroic fires:

"O warriors, partners of Achilles' praise!
Be mindful of your deeds in ancient days;
Your godlike master let your acts proclaim,
And add new glories to his mighty name.
Think your Achilles sees you fight: be brave,
And humble the proud monarch whom you save."

Joyful they heard, and kindling as he spoke,
Flew to the fleet, involved in fire and smoke.
From shore to shore the doubling shouts resound,
The hollow ships return a deeper sound.
The war stood still, and all around them gazed,
When great Achilles' shining armour blazed:
Troy saw, and thought the dread Achilles nigh,
At once they see, they tremble, and they fly.

Then first thy spear, divine Patroclus! flew,
Where the war raged, and where the tumult grew.
Close to the stern of that famed ship which bore
Unbless'd Protesilaus to Ilion's shore,
The great Paeonian, bold Pyrechmes stood;
(Who led his bands from Axius' winding flood;)
His shoulder-blade receives the fatal wound;
The groaning warrior pants upon the ground.
His troops, that see their country's glory slain,
Fly diverse, scatter'd o'er the distant plain.
Patroclus' arm forbids the spreading fires,
And from the half-burn'd ship proud Troy retires;
Clear'd from the smoke the joyful navy lies;
In heaps on heaps the foe tumultuous flies;
Triumphant Greece her rescued decks ascends,
And loud acclaim the starry region rends.
So when thick clouds enwrap the mountain's head,
O'er heaven's expanse like one black ceiling spread;
Sudden the Thunderer, with a flashing ray,
Bursts through the darkness, and lets down the day:
The hills shine out, the rocks in prospect rise,
And streams, and vales, and forests, strike the eyes;
The smiling scene wide opens to the sight,
And all the unmeasured ether flames with light.

But Troy repulsed, and scatter'd o'er the plains,
Forced from the navy, yet the fight maintains.
Now every Greek some hostile hero slew,
But still the foremost, bold Patroclus flew:
As Areilycus had turn'd him round,
Sharp in his thigh he felt the piercing wound;
The brazen-pointed spear, with vigour thrown,
The thigh transfix'd, and broke the brittle bone:
Headlong he fell. Next, Thoas was thy chance;
Thy breast, unarm'd, received the Spartan lance.
Phylides' dart (as Amphidus drew nigh)
His blow prevented, and transpierced his thigh,
Tore all the brawn, and rent the nerves away;
In darkness, and in death, the warrior lay.

In equal arms two sons of Nestor stand,
And two bold brothers of the Lycian band:
By great Antilochus, Atymnius dies,
Pierced in the flank, lamented youth! he lies,
Kind Maris, bleeding in his brother's wound,
Defends the breathless carcase on the ground;
Furious he flies, his murderer to engage:
But godlike Thrasimed prevents his rage,
Between his arm and shoulder aims a blow;
His arm falls spouting on the dust below:
He sinks, with endless darkness cover'd o'er:
And vents his soul, effused with gushing gore.

Slain by two brothers, thus two brothers bleed,
Sarpedon's friends, Amisodarus' seed;
Amisodarus, who, by Furies led,
The bane of men, abhorr'd Chimaera bred;
Skill'd in the dart in vain, his sons expire,
And pay the forfeit of their guilty sire.

Stopp'd in the tumult Cleobulus lies,
Beneath Oileus' arm, a living prize;
A living prize not long the Trojan stood;
The thirsty falchion drank his reeking blood:
Plunged in his throat the smoking weapon lies;
Black death, and fate unpitying, seal his eyes.

Amid the ranks, with mutual thirst of fame,
Lycon the brave, and fierce Peneleus came;
In vain their javelins at each other flew,
Now, met in arms, their eager swords they drew.
On the plumed crest of his Boeotian foe
The daring Lycon aim'd a noble blow;
The sword broke short; but his, Peneleus sped
Full on the juncture of the neck and head:
The head, divided by a stroke so just,
Hung by the skin; the body sunk to dust.

O'ertaken Neamas by Merion bleeds,
Pierced through the shoulder as he mounts his steeds;
Back from the car he tumbles to the ground:
His swimming eyes eternal shades surround.

Next Erymas was doom'd his fate to feel,
His open'd mouth received the Cretan steel:
Beneath the brain the point a passage tore,
Crash'd the thin bones, and drown'd the teeth in gore:
His mouth, his eyes, his nostrils, pour a flood;
He sobs his soul out in the gush of blood.

As when the flocks neglected by the swain,
Or kids, or lambs, lie scatter'd o'er the plain,
A troop of wolves the unguarded charge survey,
And rend the trembling, unresisting prey:
Thus on the foe the Greeks impetuous came;
Troy fled, unmindful of her former fame.

But still at Hector godlike Ajax aim'd,
Still, pointed at his breast, his javelin flamed.
The Trojan chief, experienced in the field,
O'er his broad shoulders spread the massy shield,
Observed the storm of darts the Grecians pour,
And on his buckler caught the ringing shower:
He sees for Greece the scale of conquest rise,
Yet stops, and turns, and saves his loved allies.

As when the hand of Jove a tempest forms,
And rolls the cloud to blacken heaven with storms,
Dark o'er the fields the ascending vapour flies,
And shades the sun, and blots the golden skies:
So from the ships, along the dusky plain,
Dire Flight and Terror drove the Trojan train.
Even Hector fled; through heads of disarray
The fiery coursers forced their lord away:
While far behind his Trojans fall confused;
Wedged in the trench, in one vast carnage bruised:
Chariots on chariots roll: the clashing spokes
Shock; while the madding steeds break short their yokes.
In vain they labour up the steepy mound;
Their charioteers lie foaming on the ground.
Fierce on the rear, with shouts Patroclus flies;
Tumultuous clamour fills the fields and skies;
Thick drifts of dust involve their rapid flight;
Clouds rise on clouds, and heaven is snatch'd from sight.
The affrighted steeds their dying lords cast down,
Scour o'er the fields, and stretch to reach the town.
Loud o'er the rout was heard the victor's cry,
Where the war bleeds, and where the thickest die,
Where horse and arms, and chariots he o'erthrown,
And bleeding heroes under axles groan.
No stop, no check, the steeds of Peleus knew:
From bank to bank the immortal coursers flew.
High-bounding o'er the fosse, the whirling car
Smokes through the ranks, o'ertakes the flying war,
And thunders after Hector; Hector flies,
Patroclus shakes his lance; but fate denies.
Not with less noise, with less impetuous force,
The tide of Trojans urge their desperate course,
Than when in autumn Jove his fury pours,
And earth is loaden with incessant showers;
(When guilty mortals break the eternal laws,
Or judges, bribed, betray the righteous cause;)
From their deep beds he bids the rivers rise,
And opens all the flood-gates of the skies:
The impetuous torrents from their hills obey,
Whole fields are drown'd, and mountains swept away;
Loud roars the deluge till it meets the main;
And trembling man sees all his labours vain!

And now the chief (the foremost troops repell'd)
Back to the ships his destined progress held,
Bore down half Troy in his resistless way,
And forced the routed ranks to stand the day.
Between the space where silver Simois flows,
Where lay the fleets, and where the rampires rose,
All grim in dust and blood Patroclus stands,
And turns the slaughter on the conquering bands.
First Pronous died beneath his fiery dart,
Which pierced below the shield his valiant heart.
Thestor was next, who saw the chief appear,
And fell the victim of his coward fear;
Shrunk up he sat, with wild and haggard eye,
Nor stood to combat, nor had force to fly;
Patroclus mark'd him as he shunn'd the war,
And with unmanly tremblings shook the car,
And dropp'd the flowing reins. Him 'twixt the jaws,
The javelin sticks, and from the chariot draws.
As on a rock that overhangs the main,
An angler, studious of the line and cane,
Some mighty fish draws panting to the shore:
Not with less ease the barbed javelin bore
The gaping dastard; as the spear was shook,
He fell, and life his heartless breast forsook.

Next on Eryalus he flies; a stone,
Large as a rock, was by his fury thrown:
Full on his crown the ponderous fragment flew,
And burst the helm, and cleft the head in two:
Prone to the ground the breathless warrior fell,
And death involved him with the shades of hell.
Then low in dust Epaltes, Echius, lie;
Ipheas, Evippus, Polymelus, die;
Amphoterus and Erymas succeed;
And last Tlepolemus and Pyres bleed.
Where'er he moves, the growing slaughters spread
In heaps on heaps a monument of dead.

When now Sarpedon his brave friends beheld
Grovelling in dust, and gasping on the field,
With this reproach his flying host he warms:
"Oh stain to honour! oh disgrace to arms!
Forsake, inglorious, the contended plain;
This hand unaided shall the war sustain:
The task be mine this hero's strength to try,
Who mows whole troops, and makes an army fly."

He spake: and, speaking, leaps from off the car:
Patroclus lights, and sternly waits the war.
As when two vultures on the mountain's height
Stoop with resounding pinions to the fight;
They cuff, they tear, they raise a screaming cry;
The desert echoes, and the rocks reply:
The warriors thus opposed in arms, engage
With equal clamours, and with equal rage.

Jove view'd the combat: whose event foreseen,
He thus bespoke his sister and his queen:
"The hour draws on; the destinies ordain,
My godlike son shall press the Phrygian plain:
Already on the verge of death he stands,
His life is owed to fierce Patroclus' hands,
What passions in a parent's breast debate!
Say, shall I snatch him from impending fate,
And send him safe to Lycia, distant far
From all the dangers and the toils of war;
Or to his doom my bravest offspring yield,
And fatten, with celestial blood, the field?"

Then thus the goddess with the radiant eyes:
"What words are these, O sovereign of the skies!
Short is the date prescribed to mortal man;
Shall Jove for one extend the narrow span,
Whose bounds were fix'd before his race began?
How many sons of gods, foredoom'd to death,
Before proud Ilion must resign their breath!
Were thine exempt, debate would rise above,
And murmuring powers condemn their partial Jove.
Give the bold chief a glorious fate in fight;
And when the ascending soul has wing'd her flight,
Let Sleep and Death convey, by thy command,
The breathless body to his native land.
His friends and people, to his future praise,
A marble tomb and pyramid shall raise,
And lasting honours to his ashes give;
His fame ('tis all the dead can have) shall live."

She said: the cloud-compeller, overcome,
Assents to fate, and ratifies the doom.
Then touch'd with grief, the weeping heavens distill'd
A shower of blood o'er all the fatal field:
The god, his eyes averting from the plain,
Laments his son, predestined to be slain,
Far from the Lycian shores, his happy native reign.
Now met in arms, the combatants appear;
Each heaved the shield, and poised the lifted spear;
From strong Patroclus' hand the javelin fled,
And pass'd the groin of valiant Thrasymed;
The nerves unbraced no more his bulk sustain,
He falls, and falling bites the bloody plain.
Two sounding darts the Lycian leader threw:
The first aloof with erring fury flew,
The next transpierced Achilles' mortal steed,
The generous Pedasus of Theban breed:
Fix'd in the shoulder's joint, he reel'd around,
Roll'd in the bloody dust, and paw'd the slippery ground.
His sudden fall the entangled harness broke;
Each axle crackled, and the chariot shook:
When bold Automedon, to disengage
The starting coursers, and restrain their rage,
Divides the traces with his sword, and freed
The encumbered chariot from the dying steed:
The rest move on, obedient to the rein:
The car rolls slowly o'er the dusty plain.

The towering chiefs to fiercer fight advance:
And first Sarpedon whirl'd his weighty lance,
Which o'er the warrior's shoulder took its course,
And spent in empty air its dying force.
Not so Patroclus' never-erring dart;
Aim'd at his breast it pierced a mortal part,
Where the strong fibres bind the solid heart.
Then as the mountain oak, or poplar tall,
Or pine (fit mast for some great admiral)
Nods to the axe, till with a groaning sound
It sinks, and spreads its honours on the ground,
Thus fell the king; and laid on earth supine,
Before his chariot stretch'd his form divine:
He grasp'd the dust distain'd with streaming gore,
And, pale in death, lay groaning on the shore.
So lies a bull beneath the lion's paws,
While the grim savage grinds with foamy jaws
The trembling limbs, and sucks the smoking blood;
Deep groans, and hollow roars, rebellow through the wood.

Then to the leader of the Lycian band
The dying chief address'd his last command;
"Glaucus, be bold; thy task be first to dare
The glorious dangers of destructive war,
To lead my troops, to combat at their head,
Incite the living, and supply the dead.
Tell them, I charged them with my latest breath
Not unrevenged to bear Sarpedon's death.
What grief, what shame, must Glaucus undergo,
If these spoil'd arms adorn a Grecian foe!
Then as a friend, and as a warrior fight;
Defend my body, conquer in my right:
That, taught by great examples, all may try
Like thee to vanquish, or like me to die."
He ceased; the Fates suppress'd his labouring breath,
And his eyes darken'd with the shades of death.
The insulting victor with disdain bestrode
The prostrate prince, and on his bosom trod;
Then drew the weapon from his panting heart,
The reeking fibres clinging to the dart;
From the wide wound gush'd out a stream of blood,
And the soul issued in the purple flood.
His flying steeds the Myrmidons detain,
Unguided now, their mighty master slain.
All-impotent of aid, transfix'd with grief,
Unhappy Glaucus heard the dying chief:
His painful arm, yet useless with the smart
Inflicted late by Teucer's deadly dart,
Supported on his better hand he stay'd:
To Phoebus then ('twas all he could) he pray'd:

"All-seeing monarch! whether Lycia's coast,
Or sacred Ilion, thy bright presence boast,
Powerful alike to ease the wretch's smart;
O hear me! god of every healing art!
Lo! stiff with clotted blood, and pierced with pain,
That thrills my arm, and shoots through every vein,
I stand unable to sustain the spear,
And sigh, at distance from the glorious war.
Low in the dust is great Sarpedon laid,
Nor Jove vouchsafed his hapless offspring aid;
But thou, O god of health! thy succour lend,
To guard the relics of my slaughter'd friend:
For thou, though distant, canst restore my might,
To head my Lycians, and support the fight."

Apollo heard; and, suppliant as he stood,
His heavenly hand restrain'd the flux of blood;
He drew the dolours from the wounded part,
And breathed a spirit in his rising heart.
Renew'd by art divine, the hero stands,
And owns the assistance of immortal hands.
First to the fight his native troops he warms,
Then loudly calls on Troy's vindictive arms;
With ample strides he stalks from place to place;
Now fires Agenor, now Polydamas:
neas next, and Hector he accosts;
Inflaming thus the rage of all their hosts.

"What thoughts, regardless chief! thy breast employ?
Oh too forgetful of the friends of Troy!
Those generous friends, who, from their country far,
Breathe their brave souls out in another's war.
See! where in dust the great Sarpedon lies,
In action valiant, and in council wise,
Who guarded right, and kept his people free;
To all his Lycians lost, and lost to thee!
Stretch'd by Patroclus' arm on yonder plains,
O save from hostile rage his loved remains!
Ah let not Greece his conquer'd trophies boast,
Nor on his corse revenge her heroes lost!"

He spoke: each leader in his grief partook:
Troy, at the loss, through all her legions shook.
Transfix'd with deep regret, they view o'erthrown
At once his country's pillar, and their own;
A chief, who led to Troy's beleaguer'd wall
A host of heroes, and outshined them all.
Fired, they rush on; first Hector seeks the foes,
And with superior vengeance greatly glows.

But o'er the dead the fierce Patroclus stands,
And rousing Ajax, roused the listening bands:

"Heroes, be men; be what you were before;
Or weigh the great occasion, and be more.
The chief who taught our lofty walls to yield,
Lies pale in death, extended on the field.
To guard his body Troy in numbers flies;
Tis half the glory to maintain our prize.
Haste, strip his arms, the slaughter round him spread,
And send the living Lycians to the dead."

The heroes kindle at his fierce command;
The martial squadrons close on either hand:
Here Troy and Lycia charge with loud alarms,
Thessalia there, and Greece, oppose their arms.
With horrid shouts they circle round the slain;
The clash of armour rings o'er all the plain.
Great Jove, to swell the horrors of the fight,
O'er the fierce armies pours pernicious night,
And round his son confounds the warring hosts,
His fate ennobling with a crowd of ghosts.

Now Greece gives way, and great Epigeus falls;
Agacleus' son, from Budium's lofty walls;
Who chased for murder thence a suppliant came
To Peleus, and the silver-footed dame;
Now sent to Troy, Achilles' arms to aid,
He pays due vengeance to his kinsman's shade.
Soon as his luckless hand had touch'd the dead,
A rock's large fragment thunder'd on his head;
Hurl'd by Hectorean force it cleft in twain
His shatter'd helm, and stretch'd him o'er the slain.

Fierce to the van of fight Patroclus came,
And, like an eagle darting at his game,
Sprung on the Trojan and the Lycian band.
What grief thy heart, what fury urged thy hand,
O generous Greek! when with full vigour thrown,
At Sthenelaus flew the weighty stone,
Which sunk him to the dead: when Troy, too near
That arm, drew back; and Hector learn'd to fear.
Far as an able hand a lance can throw,
Or at the lists, or at the fighting foe;
So far the Trojans from their lines retired;
Till Glaucus, turning, all the rest inspired.
Then Bathyclaeus fell beneath his rage,
The only hope of Chalcon's trembling age;
Wide o'er the land was stretch'd his large domain,
With stately seats, and riches blest in vain:
Him, bold with youth, and eager to pursue
The flying Lycians, Glaucus met and slew;
Pierced through the bosom with a sudden wound,
He fell, and falling made the fields resound.
The Achaians sorrow for their heroes slain;
With conquering shouts the Trojans shake the plain,
And crowd to spoil the dead: the Greeks oppose;
An iron circle round the carcase grows.

Then brave Laogonus resign'd his breath,
Despatch'd by Merion to the shades of death:
On Ida's holy hill he made abode,
The priest of Jove, and honour'd like his god.
Between the jaw and ear the javelin went;
The soul, exhaling, issued at the vent.
His spear Aeneas at the victor threw,
Who stooping forward from the death withdrew;
The lance hiss'd harmless o'er his covering shield,
And trembling struck, and rooted in the field;
There yet scarce spent, it quivers on the plain,
Sent by the great Aeneas' arm in vain.
"Swift as thou art (the raging hero cries)
And skill'd in dancing to dispute the prize,
My spear, the destined passage had it found,
Had fix'd thy active vigour to the ground."

"O valiant leader of the Dardan host!
(Insulted Merion thus retorts the boast)
Strong as you are, 'tis mortal force you trust,
An arm as strong may stretch thee in the dust.
And if to this my lance thy fate be given,
Vain are thy vaunts; success is still from heaven:
This, instant, sends thee down to Pluto's coast;
Mine is the glory, his thy parting ghost."

"O friend (Menoetius' son this answer gave)
With words to combat, ill befits the brave;
Not empty boasts the sons of Troy repel,
Your swords must plunge them to the shades of hell.
To speak, beseems the council; but to dare
In glorious action, is the task of war."

This said, Patroclus to the battle flies;
Great Merion follows, and new shouts arise:
Shields, helmets rattle, as the warriors close;
And thick and heavy sounds the storm of blows.
As through the shrilling vale, or mountain ground,
The labours of the woodman's axe resound;
Blows following blows are heard re-echoing wide,
While crackling forests fall on every side:
Thus echoed all the fields with loud alarms,
So fell the warriors, and so rung their arms.

Now great Sarpedon on the sandy shore,
His heavenly form defaced with dust and gore,
And stuck with darts by warring heroes shed,
Lies undistinguish'd from the vulgar dead.
His long-disputed corse the chiefs enclose,
On every side the busy combat grows;
Thick as beneath some shepherd's thatch'd abode
(The pails high foaming with a milky flood)
The buzzing flies, a persevering train,
Incessant swarm, and chased return again.

Jove view'd the combat with a stern survey,
And eyes that flash'd intolerable day.
Fix'd on the field his sight, his breast debates
The vengeance due, and meditates the fates:
Whether to urge their prompt effect, and call
The force of Hector to Patroclus' fall,
This instant see his short-lived trophies won,
And stretch him breathless on his slaughter'd son;
Or yet, with many a soul's untimely flight,
Augment the fame and horror of the fight.
To crown Achilles' valiant friend with praise
At length he dooms; and, that his last of days
Shall set in glory, bids him drive the foe;
Nor unattended see the shades below.
Then Hector's mind he fills with dire dismay;
He mounts his car, and calls his hosts away;
Sunk with Troy's heavy fates, he sees decline
The scales of Jove, and pants with awe divine.

Then, nor before, the hardy Lycians fled,
And left their monarch with the common dead:
Around, in heaps on heaps, a dreadful wall
Of carnage rises, as the heroes fall.
(So Jove decreed!) At length the Greeks obtain
The prize contested, and despoil the slain.
The radiant arms are by Patroclus borne;
Patroclus' ships the glorious spoils adorn.

Then thus to Phoebus, in the realms above,
Spoke from his throne the cloud-compelling Jove:
"Descend, my Phoebus! on the Phrygian plain,
And from the fight convey Sarpedon slain;
Then bathe his body in the crystal flood,
With dust dishonour'd, and deform'd with blood;
O'er all his limbs ambrosial odours shed,
And with celestial robes adorn the dead.
Those rites discharged, his sacred corse bequeath
To the soft arms of silent Sleep and Death.
They to his friends the immortal charge shall bear;
His friends a tomb and pyramid shall rear:
What honour mortals after death receive,
Those unavailing honours we may give!"

Apollo bows, and from mount Ida's height,
Swift to the field precipitates his flight;
Thence from the war the breathless hero bore,
Veil'd in a cloud, to silver Simois' shore;
There bathed his honourable wounds, and dress'd
His manly members in the immortal vest;
And with perfumes of sweet ambrosial dews
Restores his freshness, and his form renews.
Then Sleep and Death, two twins of winged race,
Of matchless swiftness, but of silent pace,
Received Sarpedon, at the god's command,
And in a moment reach'd the Lycian land;
The corse amidst his weeping friends they laid,
Where endless honours wait the sacred shade.

Meanwhile Patroclus pours along the plains,
With foaming coursers, and with loosen'd reins.
Fierce on the Trojan and the Lycian crew,
Ah blind to fate! thy headlong fury flew
Against what fate and powerful Jove ordain,
Vain was thy friend's command, thy courage vain.
For he, the god, whose counsels uncontroll'd
Dismay the mighty, and confound the bold;
The god who gives, resumes, and orders all,
He urged thee on, and urged thee on to fall.

Who first, brave hero! by that arm was slain,
Who last beneath thy vengeance press'd the plain;
When heaven itself thy fatal fury led,
And call'd to fill the number of the dead?
Adrestus first; Autonous then succeeds;
Echeclus follows; next young Megas bleeds,
Epistor, Melanippus, bite the ground;
The slaughter, Elasus and Mulius crown'd:
Then sunk Pylartes to eternal night;
The rest, dispersing, trust their fates to flight.

Now Troy had stoop'd beneath his matchless power,
But flaming Phoebus kept the sacred tower
Thrice at the battlements Patroclus strook;
His blazing aegis thrice Apollo shook;
He tried the fourth; when, bursting from the cloud,
A more than mortal voice was heard aloud.

"Patroclus! cease; this heaven-defended wall
Defies thy lance; not fated yet to fall;
Thy friend, thy greater far, it shall withstand,
Troy shall not stoop even to Achilles' hand."

So spoke the god who darts celestial fires;
The Greek obeys him, and with awe retires.
While Hector, checking at the Scaean gates
His panting coursers, in his breast debates,
Or in the field his forces to employ,
Or draw the troops within the walls of Troy.
Thus while he thought, beside him Phoebus stood,
In Asius' shape, who reigned by Sangar's flood;
(Thy brother, Hecuba! from Dymas sprung,
A valiant warrior, haughty, bold, and young;)
Thus he accosts him. "What a shameful sight!
God! is it Hector that forbears the fight?
Were thine my vigour this successful spear
Should soon convince thee of so false a fear.
Turn thee, ah turn thee to the field of fame,
And in Patroclus' blood efface thy shame.
Perhaps Apollo shall thy arms succeed,
And heaven ordains him by thy lance to bleed."

So spoke the inspiring god; then took his flight,
And plunged amidst the tumult of the fight.
He bids Cebrion drive the rapid car;
The lash resounds, the coursers rush to war.
The god the Grecians' sinking souls depress'd,
And pour'd swift spirits through each Trojan breast.
Patroclus lights, impatient for the fight;
A spear his left, a stone employs his right:
With all his nerves he drives it at the foe.
Pointed above, and rough and gross below:
The falling ruin crush'd Cebrion's head,
The lawless offspring of king Priam's bed;
His front, brows, eyes, one undistinguish'd wound:
The bursting balls drop sightless to the ground.
The charioteer, while yet he held the rein,
Struck from the car, falls headlong on the plain.
To the dark shades the soul unwilling glides,
While the proud victor thus his fall derides.

"Good heaven! what active feats yon artist shows!
What skilful divers are our Phrygian foes!
Mark with what ease they sink into the sand!
Pity that all their practice is by land!"

Then rushing sudden on his prostrate prize,
To spoil the carcase fierce Patroclus flies:
Swift as a lion, terrible and bold,
That sweeps the field, depopulates the fold;
Pierced through the dauntless heart, then tumbles slain,
And from his fatal courage finds his bane.
At once bold Hector leaping from his car,
Defends the body, and provokes the war.
Thus for some slaughter'd hind, with equal rage,
Two lordly rulers of the wood engage;
Stung with fierce hunger, each the prey invades,
And echoing roars rebellow through the shades.
Stern Hector fastens on the warrior's head,
And by the foot Patroclus drags the dead:
While all around, confusion, rage, and fright,
Mix the contending hosts in mortal fight.
So pent by hills, the wild winds roar aloud
In the deep bosom of some gloomy wood;
Leaves, arms, and trees, aloft in air are blown,
The broad oaks crackle, and the Sylvans groan;
This way and that, the rattling thicket bends,
And the whole forest in one crash descends.
Not with less noise, with less tumultuous rage,
In dreadful shock the mingled hosts engage.
Darts shower'd on darts, now round the carcase ring;
Now flights of arrows bounding from the string:
Stones follow stones; some clatter on the fields,
Some hard, and heavy, shake the sounding shields.
But where the rising whirlwind clouds the plains,
Sunk in soft dust the mighty chief remains,
And, stretch'd in death, forgets the guiding reins!

Now flaming from the zenith, Sol had driven
His fervid orb through half the vault of heaven;
While on each host with equal tempests fell
The showering darts, and numbers sank to hell.
But when his evening wheels o'erhung the main,
Glad conquest rested on the Grecian train.
Then from amidst the tumult and alarms,
They draw the conquer'd corse and radiant arms.
Then rash Patroclus with new fury glows,
And breathing slaughter, pours amid the foes.
Thrice on the press like Mars himself he flew,
And thrice three heroes at each onset slew.
There ends thy glory! there the Fates untwine
The last, black remnant of so bright a line:
Apollo dreadful stops thy middle way;
Death calls, and heaven allows no longer day!

For lo! the god in dusky clouds enshrined,
Approaching dealt a staggering blow behind.
The weighty shock his neck and shoulders feel;
His eyes flash sparkles, his stunn'd senses reel
In giddy darkness; far to distance flung,
His bounding helmet on the champaign rung.
Achilles' plume is stain'd with dust and gore;
That plume which never stoop'd to earth before;
Long used, untouch'd, in fighting fields to shine,
And shade the temples of the mad divine.
Jove dooms it now on Hector's helm to nod;
Not long--for fate pursues him, and the god.

His spear in shivers falls; his ample shield
Drops from his arm: his baldric strows the field:
The corslet his astonish'd breast forsakes:
Loose is each joint; each nerve with horror shakes;
Stupid he stares, and all-assistless stands:
Such is the force of more than mortal hands!

A Dardan youth there was, well known to fame,
From Panthus sprung, Euphorbus was his name;
Famed for the manage of the foaming horse,
Skill'd in the dart, and matchless in the course:
Full twenty knights he tumbled from the car,
While yet he learn'd his rudiments of war.
His venturous spear first drew the hero's gore;
He struck, he wounded, but he durst no more.
Nor, though disarm'd, Patroclus' fury stood:
But swift withdrew the long-protended wood.
And turn'd him short, and herded in the crowd.
Thus, by an arm divine, and mortal spear,
Wounded, at once, Patroclus yields to fear,
Retires for succour to his social train,
And flies the fate, which heaven decreed, in vain.
Stern Hector, as the bleeding chief he views,
Breaks through the ranks, and his retreat pursues:
The lance arrests him with a mortal wound;
He falls, earth thunders, and his arms resound.
With him all Greece was sunk; that moment all
Her yet-surviving heroes seem'd to fall.
So, scorch'd with heat, along the desert score,
The roaming lion meets a bristly boar,
Fast by the spring; they both dispute the flood,
With flaming eyes, and jaws besmear'd with blood;
At length the sovereign savage wins the strife;
And the torn boar resigns his thirst and life.
Patroclus thus, so many chiefs o'erthrown,
So many lives effused, expires his own.
As dying now at Hector's feet he lies,
He sternly views him, and triumphant cries:

"Lie there, Patroclus! and with thee, the joy
Thy pride once promised, of subverting Troy;
The fancied scenes of Ilion wrapt in flames,
And thy soft pleasures served with captive dames.
Unthinking man! I fought those towers to free,
And guard that beauteous race from lords like thee:
But thou a prey to vultures shalt be made;
Thy own Achilles cannot lend thee aid;
Though much at parting that great chief might say,
And much enjoin thee, this important day.

'Return not, my brave friend (perhaps he said),
Without the bloody arms of Hector dead.'
He spoke, Patroclus march'd, and thus he sped."

Supine, and wildly gazing on the skies,
With faint, expiring breath, the chief replies:

"Vain boaster! cease, and know the powers divine!
Jove's and Apollo's is this deed, not thine;
To heaven is owed whate'er your own you call,
And heaven itself disarm'd me ere my fall.
Had twenty mortals, each thy match in might,
Opposed me fairly, they had sunk in fight:
By fate and Phoebus was I first o'erthrown,
Euphorbus next; the third mean part thy own.
But thou, imperious! hear my latest breath;
The gods inspire it, and it sounds thy death:
Insulting man, thou shalt be soon as I;
Black fate o'erhangs thee, and thy hour draws nigh;
Even now on life's last verge I see thee stand,
I see thee fall, and by Achilles' hand."

He faints: the soul unwilling wings her way,
(The beauteous body left a load of clay)
Flits to the lone, uncomfortable coast;
A naked, wandering, melancholy ghost!

Then Hector pausing, as his eyes he fed
On the pale carcase, thus address'd the dead:

"From whence this boding speech, the stern decree
Of death denounced, or why denounced to me?
Why not as well Achilles' fate be given
To Hector's lance? Who knows the will of heaven?"

Pensive he said; then pressing as he lay
His breathless bosom, tore the lance away;
And upwards cast the corse: the reeking spear
He shakes, and charges the bold charioteer.
But swift Automedon with loosen'd reins
Rapt in the chariot o'er the distant plains,
Far from his rage the immortal coursers drove;
The immortal coursers were the gift of Jove.

On the cold earth divine Patroclus spread,
Lies pierced with wounds among the vulgar dead.
Great Menelaus, touch'd with generous woe,
Springs to the front, and guards him from the foe.
Thus round her new-fallen young the heifer moves,
Fruit of her throes, and first-born of her loves;
And anxious (helpless as he lies, and bare)
Turns, and re-turns her, with a mother's care,
Opposed to each that near the carcase came,
His broad shield glimmers, and his lances flame.

The son of Panthus, skill'd the dart to send,
Eyes the dead hero, and insults the friend.
"This hand, Atrides, laid Patroclus low;
Warrior! desist, nor tempt an equal blow:
To me the spoils my prowess won, resign:
Depart with life, and leave the glory mine"

The Trojan thus: the Spartan monarch burn'd
With generous anguish, and in scorn return'd:
"Laugh'st thou not, Jove! from thy superior throne,
When mortals boast of prowess not their own?
Not thus the lion glories in his might,
Nor panther braves his spotted foe in fight,
Nor thus the boar (those terrors of the plain;)
Man only vaunts his force, and vaunts in vain.
But far the vainest of the boastful kind,
These sons of Panthus vent their haughty mind.
Yet 'twas but late, beneath my conquering steel
This boaster's brother, Hyperenor, fell;
Against our arm which rashly he defied,
Vain was his vigour, and as vain his pride.
These eyes beheld him on the dust expire,
No more to cheer his spouse, or glad his sire.
Presumptuous youth! like his shall be thy doom,
Go, wait thy brother to the Stygian gloom;
Or, while thou may'st, avoid the threaten'd fate;
Fools stay to feel it, and are wise too late."

Unmoved, Euphorbus thus: "That action known,
Come, for my brother's blood repay thy own.
His weeping father claims thy destined head,
And spouse, a widow in her bridal bed.
On these thy conquer'd spoils I shall bestow,
To soothe a consort's and a parent's woe.
No longer then defer the glorious strife,
Let heaven decide our fortune, fame, and life."

Swift as the word the missile lance he flings;
The well-aim'd weapon on the buckler rings,
But blunted by the brass, innoxious falls.
On Jove the father great Atrides calls,
Nor flies the javelin from his arm in vain,
It pierced his throat, and bent him to the plain;
Wide through the neck appears the grisly wound,
Prone sinks the warrior, and his arms resound.
The shining circlets of his golden hair,
Which even the Graces might be proud to wear,
Instarr'd with gems and gold, bestrow the shore,
With dust dishonour'd, and deform'd with gore.

As the young olive, in some sylvan scene,
Crown'd by fresh fountains with eternal green,
Lifts the gay head, in snowy flowerets fair,
And plays and dances to the gentle air;
When lo! a whirlwind from high heaven invades
The tender plant, and withers all its shades;
It lies uprooted from its genial bed,
A lovely ruin now defaced and dead:
Thus young, thus beautiful, Euphorbus lay,
While the fierce Spartan tore his arms away.
Proud of his deed, and glorious in the prize,
Affrighted Troy the towering victor flies:
Flies, as before some mountain lion's ire
The village curs and trembling swains retire,
When o'er the slaughter'd bull they hear him roar,
And see his jaws distil with smoking gore:
All pale with fear, at distance scatter'd round,
They shout incessant, and the vales resound.

Meanwhile Apollo view'd with envious eyes,
And urged great Hector to dispute the prize;
(In Mentes' shape, beneath whose martial care
The rough Ciconians learn'd the trade of war;)
"Forbear (he cried) with fruitless speed to chase
Achilles' coursers, of ethereal race;
They stoop not, these, to mortal man's command,
Or stoop to none but great Achilles' hand.
Too long amused with a pursuit so vain,
Turn, and behold the brave Euphorbus slain;
By Sparta slain! for ever now suppress'd
The fire which burn'd in that undaunted breast!"

Thus having spoke, Apollo wing'd his flight,
And mix'd with mortals in the toils of fight:
His words infix'd unutterable care
Deep in great Hector's soul: through all the war
He darts his anxious eye; and, instant, view'd
The breathless hero in his blood imbued,
(Forth welling from the wound, as prone he lay)
And in the victor's hands the shining prey.
Sheath'd in bright arms, through cleaving ranks he flies,
And sends his voice in thunder to the skies:
Fierce as a flood of flame by Vulcan sent,
It flew, and fired the nations as it went.
Atrides from the voice the storm divined,
And thus explored his own unconquer'd mind:

"Then shall I quit Patroclus on the plain,
Slain in my cause, and for my honour slain!
Desert the arms, the relics, of my friend?
Or singly, Hector and his troops attend?
Sure where such partial favour heaven bestow'd,
To brave the hero were to brave the god:
Forgive me, Greece, if once I quit the field;
'Tis not to Hector, but to heaven I yield.
Yet, nor the god, nor heaven, should give me fear,
Did but the voice of Ajax reach my ear:
Still would we turn, still battle on the plains,
And give Achilles all that yet remains
Of his and our Patroclus--" This, no more
The time allow'd: Troy thicken'd on the shore.
A sable scene! The terrors Hector led.
Slow he recedes, and sighing quits the dead.

So from the fold the unwilling lion parts,
Forced by loud clamours, and a storm of darts;
He flies indeed, but threatens as he flies,
With heart indignant and retorted eyes.
Now enter'd in the Spartan ranks, he turn'd
His manly breast, and with new fury burn'd;
O'er all the black battalions sent his view,
And through the cloud the godlike Ajax knew;
Where labouring on the left the warrior stood,
All grim in arms, and cover'd o'er with blood;
There breathing courage, where the god of day
Had sunk each heart with terror and dismay.

To him the king: "Oh Ajax, oh my friend!
Haste, and Patroclus' loved remains defend:
The body to Achilles to restore
Demands our care; alas, we can no more!
For naked now, despoiled of arms, he lies;
And Hector glories in the dazzling prize."
He said, and touch'd his heart. The raging pair
Pierced the thick battle, and provoke the war.
Already had stern Hector seized his head,
And doom'd to Trojan gods the unhappy dead;
But soon as Ajax rear'd his tower-like shield,
Sprung to his car, and measured back the field,
His train to Troy the radiant armour bear,
To stand a trophy of his fame in war.

Meanwhile great Ajax (his broad shield display'd)
Guards the dead hero with the dreadful shade;
And now before, and now behind he stood:
Thus in the centre of some gloomy wood,
With many a step, the lioness surrounds
Her tawny young, beset by men and hounds;
Elate her heart, and rousing all her powers,
Dark o'er the fiery balls each hanging eyebrow lours.
Fast by his side the generous Spartan glows
With great revenge, and feeds his inward woes.

But Glaucus, leader of the Lycian aids,
On Hector frowning, thus his flight upbraids:

"Where now in Hector shall we Hector find?
A manly form, without a manly mind.
Is this, O chief! a hero's boasted fame?
How vain, without the merit, is the name!
Since battle is renounced, thy thoughts employ
What other methods may preserve thy Troy:
'Tis time to try if Ilion's state can stand
By thee alone, nor ask a foreign hand:
Mean, empty boast! but shall the Lycians stake
Their lives for you? those Lycians you forsake?
What from thy thankless arms can we expect?
Thy friend Sarpedon proves thy base neglect;
Say, shall our slaughter'd bodies guard your walls,
While unreveng'd the great Sarpedon falls?
Even where he died for Troy, you left him there,
A feast for dogs, and all the fowls of air.
On my command if any Lycian wait,
Hence let him march, and give up Troy to fate.
Did such a spirit as the gods impart
Impel one Trojan hand or Trojan heart,
(Such as should burn in every soul that draws
The sword for glory, and his country's cause)
Even yet our mutual arms we might employ,
And drag yon carcase to the walls of Troy.
Oh! were Patroclus ours, we might obtain
Sarpedon's arms and honour'd corse again!
Greece with Achilles' friend should be repaid,
And thus due honours purchased to his shade.
But words are vain--Let Ajax once appear,
And Hector trembles and recedes with fear;
Thou dar'st not meet the terrors of his eye;
And lo! already thou prepar'st to fly."

The Trojan chief with fix'd resentment eyed
The Lycian leader, and sedate replied:

"Say, is it just, my friend, that Hector's ear
From such a warrior such a speech should hear?
I deem'd thee once the wisest of thy kind,
But ill this insult suits a prudent mind.
I shun great Ajax? I desert my train?
'Tis mine to prove the rash assertion vain;
I joy to mingle where the battle bleeds,
And hear the thunder of the sounding steeds.
But Jove's high will is ever uncontroll'd,
The strong he withers, and confounds the bold;
Now crowns with fame the mighty man, and now
Strikes the fresh garland from the victor's brow!
Come, through yon squadrons let us hew the way,
And thou be witness, if I fear to-day;
If yet a Greek the sight of Hector dread,
Or yet their hero dare defend the dead."

Then turning to the martial hosts, he cries:
"Ye Trojans, Dardans, Lycians, and allies!
Be men, my friends, in action as in name,
And yet be mindful of your ancient fame.
Hector in proud Achilles' arms shall shine,
Torn from his friend, by right of conquest mine."

He strode along the field, as thus he said:
(The sable plumage nodded o'er his head:)
Swift through the spacious plain he sent a look;
One instant saw, one instant overtook
The distant band, that on the sandy shore
The radiant spoils to sacred Ilion bore.
There his own mail unbraced the field bestrow'd;
His train to Troy convey'd the massy load.
Now blazing in the immortal arms he stands;
The work and present of celestial hands;
By aged Peleus to Achilles given,
As first to Peleus by the court of heaven:
His father's arms not long Achilles wears,
Forbid by fate to reach his father's years.

Him, proud in triumph, glittering from afar,
The god whose thunder rends the troubled air
Beheld with pity; as apart he sat,
And, conscious, look'd through all the scene of fate.
He shook the sacred honours of his head;
Olympus trembled, and the godhead said;
"Ah, wretched man! unmindful of thy end!
A moment's glory; and what fates attend!
In heavenly panoply divinely bright
Thou stand'st, and armies tremble at thy sight,
As at Achilles' self! beneath thy dart
Lies slain the great Achilles' dearer part.
Thou from the mighty dead those arms hast torn,
Which once the greatest of mankind had worn.
Yet live! I give thee one illustrious day,
A blaze of glory ere thou fad'st away.
For ah! no more Andromache shall come
With joyful tears to welcome Hector home;
No more officious, with endearing charms,
From thy tired limbs unbrace Pelides' arms!"

Then with his sable brow he gave the nod
That seals his word; the sanction of the god.
The stubborn arms (by Jove's command disposed)
Conform'd spontaneous, and around him closed:
Fill'd with the god, enlarged his members grew,
Through all his veins a sudden vigour flew,
The blood in brisker tides began to roll,
And Mars himself came rushing on his soul.
Exhorting loud through all the field he strode,
And look'd, and moved, Achilles, or a god.
Now Mesthles, Glaucus, Medon, he inspires,
Now Phorcys, Chromius, and Hippothous fires;
The great Thersilochus like fury found,
Asteropaeus kindled at the sound,
And Ennomus, in augury renown'd.

"Hear, all ye hosts, and hear, unnumber'd bands
Of neighbouring nations, or of distant lands!
'Twas not for state we summon'd you so far,
To boast our numbers, and the pomp of war:
Ye came to fight; a valiant foe to chase,
To save our present, and our future race.
Tor this, our wealth, our products, you enjoy,
And glean the relics of exhausted Troy.
Now then, to conquer or to die prepare;
To die or conquer are the terms of war.
Whatever hand shall win Patroclus slain,
Whoe'er shall drag him to the Trojan train,
With Hector's self shall equal honours claim;
With Hector part the spoil, and share the fame."

Fired by his words, the troops dismiss their fears,
They join, they thicken, they protend their spears;
Full on the Greeks they drive in firm array,
And each from Ajax hopes the glorious prey:
Vain hope! what numbers shall the field o'erspread,
What victims perish round the mighty dead!

Great Ajax mark'd the growing storm from far,
And thus bespoke his brother of the war:
"Our fatal day, alas! is come, my friend;
And all our wars and glories at an end!
'Tis not this corse alone we guard in vain,
Condemn'd to vultures on the Trojan plain;
We too must yield: the same sad fate must fall
On thee, on me, perhaps, my friend, on all.
See what a tempest direful Hector spreads,
And lo! it bursts, it thunders on our heads!
Call on our Greeks, if any hear the call,
The bravest Greeks: this hour demands them all."

The warrior raised his voice, and wide around
The field re-echoed the distressful sound.
"O chiefs! O princes, to whose hand is given
The rule of men; whose glory is from heaven!
Whom with due honours both Atrides grace:
Ye guides and guardians of our Argive race!
All, whom this well-known voice shall reach from far,
All, whom I see not through this cloud of war;
Come all! let generous rage your arms employ,
And save Patroclus from the dogs of Troy."

Oilean Ajax first the voice obey'd,
Swift was his pace, and ready was his aid:
Next him Idomeneus, more slow with age,
And Merion, burning with a hero's rage.
The long-succeeding numbers who can name?
But all were Greeks, and eager all for fame.
Fierce to the charge great Hector led the throng;
Whole Troy embodied rush'd with shouts along.
Thus, when a mountain billow foams and raves,
Where some swoln river disembogues his waves,
Full in the mouth is stopp'd the rushing tide,
The boiling ocean works from side to side,
The river trembles to his utmost shore,
And distant rocks re-bellow to the roar.

Nor less resolved, the firm Achaian band
With brazen shields in horrid circle stand.
Jove, pouring darkness o'er the mingled fight,
Conceals the warriors' shining helms in night:
To him, the chief for whom the hosts contend
Had lived not hateful, for he lived a friend:
Dead he protects him with superior care.
Nor dooms his carcase to the birds of air.

The first attack the Grecians scarce sustain,
Repulsed, they yield; the Trojans seize the slain.
Then fierce they rally, to revenge led on
By the swift rage of Ajax Telamon.
(Ajax to Peleus' son the second name,
In graceful stature next, and next in fame)
With headlong force the foremost ranks he tore;
So through the thicket bursts the mountain boar,
And rudely scatters, for a distance round,
The frighted hunter and the baying hound.
The son of Lethus, brave Pelasgus' heir,
Hippothous, dragg'd the carcase through the war;
The sinewy ankles bored, the feet he bound
With thongs inserted through the double wound:
Inevitable fate o'ertakes the deed;
Doom'd by great Ajax' vengeful lance to bleed:
It cleft the helmet's brazen cheeks in twain;
The shatter'd crest and horse-hair strow the plain:
With nerves relax'd he tumbles to the ground:
The brain comes gushing through the ghastly wound:
He drops Patroclus' foot, and o'er him spread,
Now lies a sad companion of the dead:
Far from Larissa lies, his native air,
And ill requites his parents' tender care.
Lamented youth! in life's first bloom he fell,
Sent by great Ajax to the shades of hell.

Once more at Ajax Hector's javelin flies;
The Grecian marking, as it cut the skies,
Shunn'd the descending death; which hissing on,
Stretch'd in the dust the great Iphytus' son,
Schedius the brave, of all the Phocian kind
The boldest warrior and the noblest mind:
In little Panope, for strength renown'd,
He held his seat, and ruled the realms around.
Plunged in his throat, the weapon drank his blood,
And deep transpiercing through the shoulder stood;
In clanging arms the hero fell and all
The fields resounded with his weighty fall.

Phorcys, as slain Hippothous he defends,
The Telamonian lance his belly rends;
The hollow armour burst before the stroke,
And through the wound the rushing entrails broke:
In strong convulsions panting on the sands
He lies, and grasps the dust with dying hands.

Struck at the sight, recede the Trojan train:
The shouting Argives strip the heroes slain.
And now had Troy, by Greece compell'd to yield,
Fled to her ramparts, and resign'd the field;
Greece, in her native fortitude elate,
With Jove averse, had turn'd the scale of fate:
But Phoebus urged neas to the fight;
He seem'd like aged Periphas to sight:
(A herald in Anchises' love grown old,
Revered for prudence, and with prudence bold.)

Thus he--"What methods yet, O chief! remain,
To save your Troy, though heaven its fall ordain?
There have been heroes, who, by virtuous care,
By valour, numbers, and by arts of war,
Have forced the powers to spare a sinking state,
And gain'd at length the glorious odds of fate:
But you, when fortune smiles, when Jove declares
His partial favour, and assists your wars,
Your shameful efforts 'gainst yourselves employ,
And force the unwilling god to ruin Troy."

neas through the form assumed descries
The power conceal'd, and thus to Hector cries:
"Oh lasting shame! to our own fears a prey,
We seek our ramparts, and desert the day.
A god, nor is he less, my bosom warms,
And tells me, Jove asserts the Trojan arms."

He spoke, and foremost to the combat flew:
The bold example all his hosts pursue.
Then, first, Leocritus beneath him bled,
In vain beloved by valiant Lycomede;
Who view'd his fall, and, grieving at the chance,
Swift to revenge it sent his angry lance;
The whirling lance, with vigorous force address'd,
Descends, and pants in Apisaon's breast;
From rich Paeonia's vales the warrior came,
Next thee, Asteropeus! in place and fame.
Asteropeus with grief beheld the slain,
And rush'd to combat, but he rush'd in vain:
Indissolubly firm, around the dead,
Rank within rank, on buckler buckler spread,
And hemm'd with bristled spears, the Grecians stood,
A brazen bulwark, and an iron wood.
Great Ajax eyes them with incessant care,
And in an orb contracts the crowded war,
Close in their ranks commands to fight or fall,
And stands the centre and the soul of all:
Fix'd on the spot they war, and wounded, wound
A sanguine torrent steeps the reeking ground:
On heaps the Greeks, on heaps the Trojans bled,
And, thickening round them, rise the hills of dead.

Greece, in close order, and collected might,
Yet suffers least, and sways the wavering fight;
Fierce as conflicting fires the combat burns,
And now it rises, now it sinks by turns.
In one thick darkness all the fight was lost;
The sun, the moon, and all the ethereal host
Seem'd as extinct: day ravish'd from their eyes,
And all heaven's splendours blotted from the skies.
Such o'er Patroclus' body hung the night,
The rest in sunshine fought, and open light;
Unclouded there, the aerial azure spread,
No vapour rested on the mountain's head,
The golden sun pour'd forth a stronger ray,
And all the broad expansion flamed with day.
Dispersed around the plain, by fits they fight,
And here and there their scatter'd arrows light:
But death and darkness o'er the carcase spread,
There burn'd the war, and there the mighty bled.

Meanwhile the sons of Nestor, in the rear,
(Their fellows routed,) toss the distant spear,
And skirmish wide: so Nestor gave command,
When from the ships he sent the Pylian band.
The youthful brothers thus for fame contend,
Nor knew the fortune of Achilles' friend;
In thought they view'd him still, with martial joy,
Glorious in arms, and dealing death to Troy.

But round the corse the heroes pant for breath,
And thick and heavy grows the work of death:
O'erlabour'd now, with dust, and sweat, and gore,
Their knees, their legs, their feet, are covered o'er;
Drops follow drops, the clouds on clouds arise,
And carnage clogs their hands, and darkness fills their eyes.
As when a slaughter'd bull's yet reeking hide,
Strain'd with full force, and tugg'd from side to side,
The brawny curriers stretch; and labour o'er
The extended surface, drunk with fat and gore:
So tugging round the corse both armies stood;
The mangled body bathed in sweat and blood;
While Greeks and Ilians equal strength employ,
Now to the ships to force it, now to Troy.
Not Pallas' self, her breast when fury warms,
Nor he whose anger sets the world in arms,
Could blame this scene; such rage, such horror reign'd;
Such, Jove to honour the great dead ordain'd.

Achilles in his ships at distance lay,
Nor knew the fatal fortune of the day;
He, yet unconscious of Patroclus' fall,
In dust extended under Ilion's wall,
Expects him glorious from the conquered plain,
And for his wish'd return prepares in vain;
Though well he knew, to make proud Ilion bend
Was more than heaven had destined to his friend.
Perhaps to him: this Thetis had reveal'd;
The rest, in pity to her son, conceal'd.

Still raged the conflict round the hero dead,
And heaps on heaps by mutual wounds they bled.
"Cursed be the man (even private Greeks would say)
Who dares desert this well-disputed day!
First may the cleaving earth before our eyes
Gape wide, and drink our blood for sacrifice;
First perish all, ere haughty Troy shall boast
We lost Patroclus, and our glory lost!"

Thus they: while with one voice the Trojans said,
"Grant this day, Jove! or heap us on the dead!"

Then clash their sounding arms; the clangours rise,
And shake the brazen concave of the skies.

Meantime, at distance from the scene of blood,
The pensive steeds of great Achilles stood:
Their godlike master slain before their eyes,
They wept, and shared in human miseries.
In vain Automedon now shakes the rein,
Now plies the lash, and soothes and threats in vain;
Nor to the fight nor Hellespont they go,
Restive they stood, and obstinate in woe:
Still as a tombstone, never to be moved,
On some good man or woman unreproved
Lays its eternal weight; or fix'd, as stands
A marble courser by the sculptor's hands,
Placed on the hero's grave. Along their face
The big round drops coursed down with silent pace,
Conglobing on the dust. Their manes, that late
Circled their arched necks, and waved in state,
Trail'd on the dust beneath the yoke were spread,
And prone to earth was hung their languid head:
Nor Jove disdain'd to cast a pitying look,
While thus relenting to the steeds he spoke:

"Unhappy coursers of immortal strain,
Exempt from age, and deathless, now in vain;
Did we your race on mortal man bestow,
Only, alas! to share in mortal woe?
For ah! what is there of inferior birth,
That breathes or creeps upon the dust of earth;
What wretched creature of what wretched kind,
Than man more weak, calamitous, and blind?
A miserable race! but cease to mourn:
For not by you shall Priam's son be borne
High on the splendid car: one glorious prize
He rashly boasts: the rest our will denies.
Ourself will swiftness to your nerves impart,
Ourself with rising spirits swell your heart.
Automedon your rapid flight shall bear
Safe to the navy through the storm of war.
For yet 'tis given to Troy to ravage o'er
The field, and spread her slaughters to the shore;
The sun shall see her conquer, till his fall
With sacred darkness shades the face of all."

He said; and breathing in the immortal horse
Excessive spirit, urged them to the course;
From their high manes they shake the dust, and bear
The kindling chariot through the parted war:
So flies a vulture through the clamorous train
Of geese, that scream, and scatter round the plain.
From danger now with swiftest speed they flew,
And now to conquest with like speed pursue;
Sole in the seat the charioteer remains,
Now plies the javelin, now directs the reins:
Him brave Alcimedon beheld distress'd,
Approach'd the chariot, and the chief address'd:

"What god provokes thee rashly thus to dare,
Alone, unaided, in the thickest war?
Alas! thy friend is slain, and Hector wields
Achilles' arms triumphant in the fields."

"In happy time (the charioteer replies)
The bold Alcimedon now greets my eyes;
No Greek like him the heavenly steeds restrains,
Or holds their fury in suspended reins:
Patroclus, while he lived, their rage could tame,
But now Patroclus is an empty name!
To thee I yield the seat, to thee resign
The ruling charge: the task of fight be mine."

He said. Alcimedon, with active heat,
Snatches the reins, and vaults into the seat.
His friend descends. The chief of Troy descried,
And call'd neas fighting near his side.

"Lo, to my sight, beyond our hope restored,
Achilles' car, deserted of its lord!
The glorious steeds our ready arms invite,
Scarce their weak drivers guide them through the fight.
Can such opponents stand when we assail?
Unite thy force, my friend, and we prevail."

The son of Venus to the counsel yields;
Then o'er their backs they spread their solid shields:
With brass refulgent the broad surface shined,
And thick bull-hides the spacious concave lined.
Them Chromius follows, Aretus succeeds;
Each hopes the conquest of the lofty steeds:
In vain, brave youths, with glorious hopes ye burn,
In vain advance! not fated to return.

Unmov'd, Automedon attends the fight,
Implores the Eternal, and collects his might.
Then turning to his friend, with dauntless mind:
"Oh keep the foaming coursers close behind!
Full on my shoulders let their nostrils blow,
For hard the fight, determined is the foe;
'Tis Hector comes: and when he seeks the prize,
War knows no mean; he wins it or he dies."

Then through the field he sends his voice aloud,
And calls the Ajaces from the warring crowd,
With great Atrides. "Hither turn, (he said,)
Turn where distress demands immediate aid;
The dead, encircled by his friends, forego,
And save the living from a fiercer foe.
Unhelp'd we stand, unequal to engage
The force of Hector, and neas' rage:
Yet mighty as they are, my force to prove
Is only mine: the event belongs to Jove."

He spoke, and high the sounding javelin flung,
Which pass'd the shield of Aretus the young:
It pierced his belt, emboss'd with curious art,
Then in the lower belly struck the dart.
As when a ponderous axe, descending full,
Cleaves the broad forehead of some brawny bull:
Struck 'twixt the horns, he springs with many a bound,
Then tumbling rolls enormous on the ground:
Thus fell the youth; the air his soul received,
And the spear trembled as his entrails heaved.

Now at Automedon the Trojan foe
Discharged his lance; the meditated blow,
Stooping, he shunn'd; the javelin idly fled,
And hiss'd innoxious o'er the hero's head;
Deep rooted in the ground, the forceful spear
In long vibrations spent its fury there.
With clashing falchions now the chiefs had closed,
But each brave Ajax heard, and interposed;
Nor longer Hector with his Trojans stood,
But left their slain companion in his blood:
His arms Automedon divests, and cries,
"Accept, Patroclus, this mean sacrifice:
Thus have I soothed my griefs, and thus have paid,
Poor as it is, some offering to thy shade."

So looks the lion o'er a mangled boar,
All grim with rage, and horrible with gore;
High on the chariot at one bound he sprung,
And o'er his seat the bloody trophies hung.

And now Minerva from the realms of air
Descends impetuous, and renews the war;
For, pleased at length the Grecian arms to aid,
The lord of thunders sent the blue-eyed maid.
As when high Jove denouncing future woe,
O'er the dark clouds extends his purple bow,
(In sign of tempests from the troubled air,
Or from the rage of man, destructive war,)
The drooping cattle dread the impending skies,
And from his half-till'd field the labourer flies:
In such a form the goddess round her drew
A livid cloud, and to the battle flew.
Assuming Phoenix' shape on earth she falls,
And in his well-known voice to Sparta calls:
"And lies Achilles' friend, beloved by all,
A prey to dogs beneath the Trojan wall?
What shame 'o Greece for future times to tell,
To thee the greatest in whose cause he fell!"
"O chief, O father! (Atreus' son replies)
O full of days! by long experience wise!
What more desires my soul, than here unmoved
To guard the body of the man I loved?
Ah, would Minerva send me strength to rear
This wearied arm, and ward the storm of war!
But Hector, like the rage of fire, we dread,
And Jove's own glories blaze around his head!"

Pleased to be first of all the powers address'd,
She breathes new vigour in her hero's breast,
And fills with keen revenge, with fell despite,
Desire of blood, and rage, and lust of fight.
So burns the vengeful hornet (soul all o'er),
Repulsed in vain, and thirsty still of gore;
(Bold son of air and heat) on angry wings
Untamed, untired, he turns, attacks, and stings.
Fired with like ardour fierce Atrides flew,
And sent his soul with every lance he threw.

There stood a Trojan, not unknown to fame,
Aetion's son, and Podes was his name:
With riches honour'd, and with courage bless'd,
By Hector loved, his comrade, and his guest;
Through his broad belt the spear a passage found,
And, ponderous as he falls, his arms resound.
Sudden at Hector's side Apollo stood,
Like Phaenops, Asius' son, appear'd the god;
(Asius the great, who held his wealthy reign
In fair Abydos, by the rolling main.)

"Oh prince! (he cried) Oh foremost once in fame!
What Grecian now shall tremble at thy name?
Dost thou at length to Menelaus yield,
A chief once thought no terror of the field?
Yet singly, now, the long-disputed prize
He bears victorious, while our army flies:
By the same arm illustrious Podes bled;
The friend of Hector, unrevenged, is dead!"
This heard, o'er Hector spreads a cloud of woe,
Rage lifts his lance, and drives him on the foe.

But now the Eternal shook his sable shield,
That shaded Ide and all the subject field
Beneath its ample verge. A rolling cloud
Involved the mount; the thunder roar'd aloud;
The affrighted hills from their foundations nod,
And blaze beneath the lightnings of the god:
At one regard of his all-seeing eye
The vanquish'd triumph, and the victors fly.

Then trembled Greece: the flight Peneleus led;
For as the brave Boeotian turn'd his head
To face the foe, Polydamas drew near,
And razed his shoulder with a shorten'd spear:
By Hector wounded, Leitus quits the plain,
Pierced through the wrist; and raging with the pain,
Grasps his once formidable lance in vain.

As Hector follow'd, Idomen address'd
The flaming javelin to his manly breast;
The brittle point before his corslet yields;
Exulting Troy with clamour fills the fields:
High on his chariots the Cretan stood,
The son of Priam whirl'd the massive wood.
But erring from its aim, the impetuous spear
Struck to the dust the squire and charioteer
Of martial Merion: Coeranus his name,
Who left fair Lyctus for the fields of fame.
On foot bold Merion fought; and now laid low,
Had graced the triumphs of his Trojan foe,
But the brave squire the ready coursers brought,
And with his life his master's safety bought.
Between his cheek and ear the weapon went,
The teeth it shatter'd, and the tongue it rent.
Prone from the seat he tumbles to the plain;
His dying hand forgets the falling rein:
This Merion reaches, bending from the car,
And urges to desert the hopeless war:
Idomeneus consents; the lash applies;
And the swift chariot to the navy flies.

Not Ajax less the will of heaven descried,
And conquest shifting to the Trojan side,
Turn'd by the hand of Jove. Then thus begun,
To Atreus's seed, the godlike Telamon:

"Alas! who sees not Jove's almighty hand
Transfers the glory to the Trojan band?
Whether the weak or strong discharge the dart,
He guides each arrow to a Grecian heart:
Not so our spears; incessant though they rain,
He suffers every lance to fall in vain.
Deserted of the god, yet let us try
What human strength and prudence can supply;
If yet this honour'd corse, in triumph borne,
May glad the fleets that hope not our return,
Who tremble yet, scarce rescued from their fates,
And still hear Hector thundering at their gates.
Some hero too must be despatch'd to bear
The mournful message to Pelides' ear;
For sure he knows not, distant on the shore,
His friend, his loved Patroclus, is no more.
But such a chief I spy not through the host:
The men, the steeds, the armies, all are lost
In general darkness--Lord of earth and air!
Oh king! Oh father! hear my humble prayer:
Dispel this cloud, the light of heaven restore;
Give me to see, and Ajax asks no more:
If Greece must perish, we thy will obey,
But let us perish in the face of day!"

With tears the hero spoke, and at his prayer
The god relenting clear'd the clouded air;
Forth burst the sun with all-enlightening ray;
The blaze of armour flash'd against the day.
"Now, now, Atrides! cast around thy sight;
If yet Antilochus survives the fight,
Let him to great Achilles' ear convey
The fatal news"--Atrides hastes away.

So turns the lion from the nightly fold,
Though high in courage, and with hunger bold,
Long gall'd by herdsmen, and long vex'd by hounds,
Stiff with fatigue, and fretted sore with wounds;
The darts fly round him from a hundred hands,
And the red terrors of the blazing brands:
Till late, reluctant, at the dawn of day
Sour he departs, and quits the untasted prey,
So moved Atrides from his dangerous place
With weary limbs, but with unwilling pace;
The foe, he fear'd, might yet Patroclus gain,
And much admonish'd, much adjured his train:

"O guard these relics to your charge consign'd,
And bear the merits of the dead in mind;
How skill'd he was in each obliging art;
The mildest manners, and the gentlest heart:
He was, alas! but fate decreed his end,
In death a hero, as in life a friend!"

So parts the chief; from rank to rank he flew,
And round on all sides sent his piercing view.
As the bold bird, endued with sharpest eye
Of all that wings the mid aerial sky,
The sacred eagle, from his walks above
Looks down, and sees the distant thicket move;
Then stoops, and sousing on the quivering hare,
Snatches his life amid the clouds of air.
Not with less quickness, his exerted sight
Pass'd this and that way, through the ranks of fight:
Till on the left the chief he sought, he found,
Cheering his men, and spreading deaths around:

To him the king: "Beloved of Jove! draw near,
For sadder tidings never touch'd thy ear;
Thy eyes have witness'd what a fatal turn!
How Ilion triumphs, and the Achaians mourn.
This is not all: Patroclus, on the shore
Now pale and dead, shall succour Greece no more.
Fly to the fleet, this instant fly, and tell
The sad Achilles, how his loved-one fell:
He too may haste the naked corse to gain:
The arms are Hector's, who despoil'd the slain."

The youthful warrior heard with silent woe,
From his fair eyes the tears began to flow:
Big with the mighty grief, he strove to say
What sorrow dictates, but no word found way.
To brave Laodocus his arms he flung,
Who, near him wheeling, drove his steeds along;
Then ran the mournful message to impart,
With tearful eyes, and with dejected heart.

Swift fled the youth: nor Menelaus stands
(Though sore distress'd) to aid the Pylian bands;
But bids bold Thrasymede those troops sustain;
Himself returns to his Patroclus slain.
"Gone is Antilochus (the hero said);
But hope not, warriors, for Achilles' aid:
Though fierce his rage, unbounded be his woe,
Unarm'd, he fights not with the Trojan foe.
'Tis in our hands alone our hopes remain,
'Tis our own vigour must the dead regain,
And save ourselves, while with impetuous hate
Troy pours along, and this way rolls our fate."

"'Tis well (said Ajax), be it then thy care,
With Merion's aid, the weighty corse to rear;
Myself, and my bold brother will sustain
The shock of Hector and his charging train:
Nor fear we armies, fighting side by side;
What Troy can dare, we have already tried,
Have tried it, and have stood." The hero said.
High from the ground the warriors heave the dead.
A general clamour rises at the sight:
Loud shout the Trojans, and renew the fight.
Not fiercer rush along the gloomy wood,
With rage insatiate, and with thirst of blood,
Voracious hounds, that many a length before
Their furious hunters, drive the wounded boar;
But if the savage turns his glaring eye,
They howl aloof, and round the forest fly.
Thus on retreating Greece the Trojans pour,
Wave their thick falchions, and their javelins shower:
But Ajax turning, to their fears they yield,
All pale they tremble and forsake the field.

While thus aloft the hero's corse they bear,
Behind them rages all the storm of war:
Confusion, tumult, horror, o'er the throng
Of men, steeds, chariots, urged the rout along:
Less fierce the winds with rising flames conspire
To whelm some city under waves of fire;
Now sink in gloomy clouds the proud abodes,
Now crack the blazing temples of the gods;
The rumbling torrent through the ruin rolls,
And sheets of smoke mount heavy to the poles.
The heroes sweat beneath their honour'd load:
As when two mules, along the rugged road,
From the steep mountain with exerted strength
Drag some vast beam, or mast's unwieldy length;
Inly they groan, big drops of sweat distil,
The enormous timber lumbering down the hill:
So these--Behind, the bulk of Ajax stands,
And breaks the torrent of the rushing bands.
Thus when a river swell'd with sudden rains
Spreads his broad waters o'er the level plains,
Some interposing hill the stream divides.
And breaks its force, and turns the winding tides.
Still close they follow, close the rear engage;
Aeneas storms, and Hector foams with rage:
While Greece a heavy, thick retreat maintains,
Wedged in one body, like a flight of cranes,
That shriek incessant, while the falcon, hung
High on poised pinions, threats their callow young.
So from the Trojan chiefs the Grecians fly,
Such the wild terror, and the mingled cry:
Within, without the trench, and all the way,
Strow'd in bright heaps, their arms and armour lay;
Such horror Jove impress'd! yet still proceeds
The work of death, and still the battle bleeds.

Thus like the rage of fire the combat burns,
And now it rises, now it sinks by turns.
Meanwhile, where Hellespont's broad waters flow,
Stood Nestor's son, the messenger of woe:
There sat Achilles, shaded by his sails,
On hoisted yards extended to the gales;
Pensive he sat; for all that fate design'd
Rose in sad prospect to his boding mind.
Thus to his soul he said: "Ah! what constrains
The Greeks, late victors, now to quit the plains?
Is this the day, which heaven so long ago
Ordain'd, to sink me with the weight of woe?
(So Thetis warn'd;) when by a Trojan hand
The bravest of the Myrmidonian band
Should lose the light! Fulfilled is that decree;
Fallen is the warrior, and Patroclus he!
In vain I charged him soon to quit the plain,
And warn'd to shun Hectorean force in vain!"

Thus while he thinks, Antilochus appears,
And tells the melancholy tale with tears.
"Sad tidings, son of Peleus! thou must hear;
And wretched I, the unwilling messenger!
Dead is Patroclus! For his corse they fight;
His naked corse: his arms are Hector's right."

A sudden horror shot through all the chief,
And wrapp'd his senses in the cloud of grief;
Cast on the ground, with furious hands he spread
The scorching ashes o'er his graceful head;
His purple garments, and his golden hairs,
Those he deforms with dust, and these he tears;
On the hard soil his groaning breast he threw,
And roll'd and grovell'd, as to earth he grew.
The virgin captives, with disorder'd charms,
(Won by his own, or by Patroclus' arms,)
Rush'd from their tents with cries; and gathering round,
Beat their white breasts, and fainted on the ground:
While Nestor's son sustains a manlier part,
And mourns the warrior with a warrior's heart;
Hangs on his arms, amidst his frantic woe,
And oft prevents the meditated blow.

Far in the deep abysses of the main,
With hoary Nereus, and the watery train,
The mother-goddess from her crystal throne
Heard his loud cries, and answer'd groan for groan.
The circling Nereids with their mistress weep,
And all the sea-green sisters of the deep.
Thalia, Glauce (every watery name),
Nesaea mild, and silver Spio came:
Cymothoe and Cymodoce were nigh,
And the blue languish of soft Alia's eye.
Their locks Actaea and Limnoria rear,
Then Proto, Doris, Panope appear,
Thoa, Pherusa, Doto, Melita;
Agave gentle, and Amphithoe gay:
Next Callianira, Callianassa show
Their sister looks; Dexamene the slow,
And swift Dynamene, now cut the tides:
Iaera now the verdant wave divides:
Nemertes with Apseudes lifts the head,
Bright Galatea quits her pearly bed;
These Orythia, Clymene, attend,
Maera, Amphinome, the train extend;
And black Janira, and Janassa fair,
And Amatheia with her amber hair.
All these, and all that deep in ocean held
Their sacred seats, the glimmering grotto fill'd;
Each beat her ivory breast with silent woe,
Till Thetis' sorrows thus began to flow:

"Hear me, and judge, ye sisters of the main!
How just a cause has Thetis to complain!
How wretched, were I mortal, were my fate!
How more than wretched in the immortal state!
Sprung from my bed a godlike hero came,
The bravest far that ever bore the name;
Like some fair olive, by my careful hand
He grew, he flourish'd and adorn'd the land
To Troy I sent him: but the fates ordain
He never, never must return again.
So short a space the light of heaven to view,
So short, alas! and fill'd with anguish too!
Hear how his sorrows echo through the shore!
I cannot ease them, but I must deplore;
I go at least to bear a tender part,
And mourn my loved-one with a mother's heart."

She said, and left the caverns of the main,
All bathed in tears; the melancholy train
Attend her way. Wide-opening part the tides,
While the long pomp the silver wave divides.
Approaching now, they touch'd the Trojan land;
Then, two by two, ascended up the strand.
The immortal mother, standing close beside
Her mournful offspring, to his sighs replied;
Along the coast their mingled clamours ran,
And thus the silver-footed dame began:

"Why mourns my son? thy late preferr'd request
The god has granted, and the Greeks distress'd:
Why mourns my son? thy anguish let me share,
Reveal the cause, and trust a parent's care."

He, deeply groaning--"To this cureless grief,
Not even the Thunderer's favour brings relief.
Patroclus--Ah!--say, goddess, can I boast
A pleasure now? revenge itself is lost;
Patroclus, loved of all my martial train,
Beyond mankind, beyond myself is slain!
Lost are those arms the gods themselves bestow'd
On Peleus; Hector bears the glorious load.
Cursed be that day, when all the powers above
Thy charms submitted to a mortal love:
O hadst thou still, a sister of the main,
Pursued the pleasures of the watery reign:
And happier Peleus, less ambitious, led
A mortal beauty to his equal bed!
Ere the sad fruit of thy unhappy womb
Had caused such sorrows past, and woes to come.
For soon, alas! that wretched offspring slain,
New woes, new sorrows, shall create again.
'Tis not in fate the alternate now to give;
Patroclus dead, Achilles hates to live.
Let me revenge it on proud Hector's heart,
Let his last spirit smoke upon my dart;
On these conditions will I breathe: till then,
I blush to walk among the race of men."

A flood of tears, at this, the goddess shed:
"Ah then, I see thee dying, see thee dead!
When Hector falls, thou diest."--"Let Hector die,
And let me fall! (Achilles made reply)
Far lies Patroclus from his native plain!
He fell, and falling, wish'd my aid in vain.
Ah then, since from this miserable day
I cast all hope of my return away;
Since, unrevenged, a hundred ghosts demand
The fate of Hector from Achilles' hand;
Since here, for brutal courage far renown'd,
I live an idle burden to the ground,
(Others in council famed for nobler skill,
More useful to preserve, than I to kill,)
Let me--But oh! ye gracious powers above!
Wrath and revenge from men and gods remove:
Far, far too dear to every mortal breast,
Sweet to the soul, as honey to the taste:
Gathering like vapours of a noxious kind
From fiery blood, and darkening all the mind.
Me Agamemnon urged to deadly hate;
'Tis past--I quell it; I resign to fate.
Yes--I will meet the murderer of my friend;
Or (if the gods ordain it) meet my end.
The stroke of fate the strongest cannot shun:
The great Alcides, Jove's unequall'd son,
To Juno's hate, at length resign'd his breath,
And sunk the victim of all-conquering death.
So shall Achilles fall! stretch'd pale and dead,
No more the Grecian hope, or Trojan dread!
Let me, this instant, rush into the fields,
And reap what glory life's short harvest yields.
Shall I not force some widow'd dame to tear
With frantic hands her long dishevell'd hair?
Shall I not force her breast to heave with sighs,
And the soft tears to trickle from her eyes?
Yes, I shall give the fair those mournful charms--
In vain you hold me--Hence! my arms! my arms!--
Soon shall the sanguine torrent spread so wide,
That all shall know Achilles swells the tide."

"My son (coerulean Thetis made reply,
To fate submitting with a secret sigh,)
The host to succour, and thy friends to save,
Is worthy thee; the duty of the brave.
But canst thou, naked, issue to the plains?
Thy radiant arms the Trojan foe detains.
Insulting Hector bears the spoils on high,
But vainly glories, for his fate is nigh.
Yet, yet awhile thy generous ardour stay;
Assured, I meet thee at the dawn of day,
Charged with refulgent arms (a glorious load),
Vulcanian arms, the labour of a god."

Then turning to the daughters of the main,
The goddess thus dismiss'd her azure train:

"Ye sister Nereids! to your deeps descend;
Haste, and our father's sacred seat attend;
I go to find the architect divine,
Where vast Olympus' starry summits shine:
So tell our hoary sire"--This charge she gave:
The sea-green sisters plunge beneath the wave:
Thetis once more ascends the bless'd abodes,
And treads the brazen threshold of the gods.

And now the Greeks from furious Hector's force,
Urge to broad Hellespont their headlong course;
Nor yet their chiefs Patroclus' body bore
Safe through the tempest to the tented shore.
The horse, the foot, with equal fury join'd,
Pour'd on the rear, and thunder'd close behind:
And like a flame through fields of ripen'd corn,
The rage of Hector o'er the ranks was borne.
Thrice the slain hero by the foot he drew;
Thrice to the skies the Trojan clamours flew:
As oft the Ajaces his assault sustain;
But check'd, he turns; repuls'd, attacks again.
With fiercer shouts his lingering troops he fires,
Nor yields a step, nor from his post retires:
So watchful shepherds strive to force, in vain,
The hungry lion from a carcase slain.
Even yet Patroclus had he borne away,
And all the glories of the extended day,
Had not high Juno from the realms of air,
Secret, despatch'd her trusty messenger.
The various goddess of the showery bow,
Shot in a whirlwind to the shore below;
To great Achilles at his ships she came,
And thus began the many-colour'd dame:

"Rise, son of Peleus! rise, divinely brave!
Assist the combat, and Patroclus save:
For him the slaughter to the fleet they spread,
And fall by mutual wounds around the dead.
To drag him back to Troy the foe contends:
Nor with his death the rage of Hector ends:
A prey to dogs he dooms the corse to lie,
And marks the place to fix his head on high.
Rise, and prevent (if yet you think of fame)
Thy friend's disgrace, thy own eternal shame!"

"Who sends thee, goddess, from the ethereal skies?"
Achilles thus. And Iris thus replies:

"I come, Pelides! from the queen of Jove,
The immortal empress of the realms above;
Unknown to him who sits remote on high,
Unknown to all the synod of the sky."
"Thou comest in vain (he cries, with fury warm'd);
Arms I have none, and can I fight unarm'd?
Unwilling as I am, of force I stay,
Till Thetis bring me at the dawn of day
Vulcanian arms: what other can I wield,
Except the mighty Telamonian shield?
That, in my friend's defence, has Ajax spread,
While his strong lance around him heaps the dead:
The gallant chief defends Menoetius' son,
And does what his Achilles should have done."

"Thy want of arms (said Iris) well we know;
But though unarm'd, yet clad in terrors, go!
Let but Achilles o'er yon trench appear,
Proud Troy shall tremble, and consent to fear;
Greece from one glance of that tremendous eye
Shall take new courage, and disdain to fly."

She spoke, and pass'd in air. The hero rose:
Her aegis Pallas o'er his shoulder throws;
Around his brows a golden cloud she spread;
A stream of glory flamed above his head.
As when from some beleaguer'd town arise
The smokes, high curling to the shaded skies;
(Seen from some island, o'er the main afar,
When men distress'd hang out the sign of war;)
Soon as the sun in ocean hides his rays,
Thick on the hills the flaming beacons blaze;
With long-projected beams the seas are bright,
And heaven's high arch reflects the ruddy light:
So from Achilles' head the splendours rise,
Reflecting blaze on blaze against the skies.
Forth march'd the chief, and distant from the crowd,
High on the rampart raised his voice aloud;
With her own shout Minerva swells the sound;
Troy starts astonish'd, and the shores rebound.
As the loud trumpet's brazen mouth from far
With shrilling clangour sounds the alarm of war,
Struck from the walls, the echoes float on high,
And the round bulwarks and thick towers reply;
So high his brazen voice the hero rear'd:
Hosts dropp'd their arms, and trembled as they heard:
And back the chariots roll, and coursers bound,
And steeds and men lie mingled on the ground.
Aghast they see the living lightnings play,
And turn their eyeballs from the flashing ray.
Thrice from the trench his dreadful voice he raised,
And thrice they fled, confounded and amazed.
Twelve in the tumult wedged, untimely rush'd
On their own spears, by their own chariots crush'd:
While, shielded from the darts, the Greeks obtain
The long-contended carcase of the slain.

A lofty bier the breathless warrior bears:
Around, his sad companions melt in tears.
But chief Achilles, bending down his head,
Pours unavailing sorrows o'er the dead,
Whom late triumphant, with his steeds and car,
He sent refulgent to the field of war;
(Unhappy change!) now senseless, pale, he found,
Stretch'd forth, and gash'd with many a gaping wound.

Meantime, unwearied with his heavenly way,
In ocean's waves the unwilling light of day
Quench'd his red orb, at Juno's high command,
And from their labours eased the Achaian band.
The frighted Trojans (panting from the war,
Their steeds unharness'd from the weary car)
A sudden council call'd: each chief appear'd
In haste, and standing; for to sit they fear'd.
'Twas now no season for prolong'd debate;
They saw Achilles, and in him their fate.
Silent they stood: Polydamas at last,
Skill'd to discern the future by the past,
The son of Panthus, thus express'd his fears
(The friend of Hector, and of equal years;
The self-same night to both a being gave,
One wise in council, one in action brave):

"In free debate, my friends, your sentence speak;
For me, I move, before the morning break,
To raise our camp: too dangerous here our post,
Far from Troy walls, and on a naked coast.
I deem'd not Greece so dreadful, while engaged
In mutual feuds her king and hero raged;
Then, while we hoped our armies might prevail
We boldly camp'd beside a thousand sail.
I dread Pelides now: his rage of mind
Not long continues to the shores confined,
Nor to the fields, where long in equal fray
Contending nations won and lost the day;
For Troy, for Troy, shall henceforth be the strife,
And the hard contest not for fame, but life.
Haste then to Ilion, while the favouring night
Detains these terrors, keeps that arm from fight.
If but the morrow's sun behold us here,
That arm, those terrors, we shall feel, not fear;
And hearts that now disdain, shall leap with joy,
If heaven permit them then to enter Troy.
Let not my fatal prophecy be true,
Nor what I tremble but to think, ensue.
Whatever be our fate, yet let us try
What force of thought and reason can supply;
Let us on counsel for our guard depend;
The town her gates and bulwarks shall defend.
When morning dawns, our well-appointed powers,
Array'd in arms, shall line the lofty towers.
Let the fierce hero, then, when fury calls,
Vent his mad vengeance on our rocky walls,
Or fetch a thousand circles round the plain,
Till his spent coursers seek the fleet again:
So may his rage be tired, and labour'd down!
And dogs shall tear him ere he sack the town."

"Return! (said Hector, fired with stern disdain)
What! coop whole armies in our walls again?
Was't not enough, ye valiant warriors, say,
Nine years imprison'd in those towers ye lay?
Wide o'er the world was Ilion famed of old
For brass exhaustless, and for mines of gold:
But while inglorious in her walls we stay'd,
Sunk were her treasures, and her stores decay'd;
The Phrygians now her scatter'd spoils enjoy,
And proud Maeonia wastes the fruits of Troy.
Great Jove at length my arms to conquest calls,
And shuts the Grecians in their wooden walls,
Darest thou dispirit whom the gods incite?
Flies any Trojan? I shall stop his flight.
To better counsel then attention lend;
Take due refreshment, and the watch attend.
If there be one whose riches cost him care,
Forth let him bring them for the troops to share;
'Tis better generously bestow'd on those,
Than left the plunder of our country's foes.
Soon as the morn the purple orient warms,
Fierce on yon navy will we pour our arms.
If great Achilles rise in all his might,
His be the danger: I shall stand the fight.
Honour, ye gods! or let me gain or give;
And live he glorious, whosoe'er shall live!
Mars is our common lord, alike to all;
And oft the victor triumphs, but to fall."

The shouting host in loud applauses join'd;
So Pallas robb'd the many of their mind;
To their own sense condemn'd, and left to choose
The worst advice, the better to refuse.

While the long night extends her sable reign,
Around Patroclus mourn'd the Grecian train.
Stern in superior grief Pelides stood;
Those slaughtering arms, so used to bathe in blood,
Now clasp his clay-cold limbs: then gushing start
The tears, and sighs burst from his swelling heart.
The lion thus, with dreadful anguish stung,
Roars through the desert, and demands his young;
When the grim savage, to his rifled den
Too late returning, snuffs the track of men,
And o'er the vales and o'er the forest bounds;
His clamorous grief the bellowing wood resounds.
So grieves Achilles; and, impetuous, vents
To all his Myrmidons his loud laments.

"In what vain promise, gods! did I engage,
When to console Menoetius' feeble age,
I vowed his much-loved offspring to restore,
Charged with rich spoils, to fair Opuntia's shore?
But mighty Jove cuts short, with just disdain,
The long, long views of poor designing man!
One fate the warrior and the friend shall strike,
And Troy's black sands must drink our blood alike:
Me too a wretched mother shall deplore,
An aged father never see me more!
Yet, my Patroclus! yet a space I stay,
Then swift pursue thee on the darksome way.
Ere thy dear relics in the grave are laid,
Shall Hector's head be offer'd to thy shade;
That, with his arms, shall hang before thy shrine;
And twelve, the noblest of the Trojan line,
Sacred to vengeance, by this hand expire;
Their lives effused around thy flaming pyre.
Thus let me lie till then! thus, closely press'd,
Bathe thy cold face, and sob upon thy breast!
While Trojan captives here thy mourners stay,
Weep all the night and murmur all the day:
Spoils of my arms, and thine; when, wasting wide,
Our swords kept time, and conquer'd side by side."

He spoke, and bade the sad attendants round
Cleanse the pale corse, and wash each honour'd wound.
A massy caldron of stupendous frame
They brought, and placed it o'er the rising flame:
Then heap'd the lighted wood; the flame divides
Beneath the vase, and climbs around the sides:
In its wide womb they pour the rushing stream;
The boiling water bubbles to the brim.
The body then they bathe with pious toil,
Embalm the wounds, anoint the limbs with oil,
High on a bed of state extended laid,
And decent cover'd with a linen shade;
Last o'er the dead the milk-white veil they threw;
That done, their sorrows and their sighs renew.

Meanwhile to Juno, in the realms above,
(His wife and sister,) spoke almighty Jove.
"At last thy will prevails: great Peleus' son
Rises in arms: such grace thy Greeks have won.
Say (for I know not), is their race divine,
And thou the mother of that martial line?"

"What words are these? (the imperial dame replies,
While anger flash'd from her majestic eyes)
Succour like this a mortal arm might lend,
And such success mere human wit attend:
And shall not I, the second power above,
Heaven's queen, and consort of the thundering Jove,
Say, shall not I one nation's fate command,
Not wreak my vengeance on one guilty land?"

So they. Meanwhile the silver-footed dame
Reach'd the Vulcanian dome, eternal frame!
High-eminent amid the works divine,
Where heaven's far-beaming brazen mansions shine.
There the lame architect the goddess found,
Obscure in smoke, his forges flaming round,
While bathed in sweat from fire to fire he flew;
And puffing loud, the roaring billows blew.
That day no common task his labour claim'd:
Full twenty tripods for his hall he framed,
That placed on living wheels of massy gold,
(Wondrous to tell,) instinct with spirit roll'd
From place to place, around the bless'd abodes
Self-moved, obedient to the beck of gods:
For their fair handles now, o'erwrought with flowers,
In moulds prepared, the glowing ore he pours.
Just as responsive to his thought the frame
Stood prompt to move, the azure goddess came:
Charis, his spouse, a grace divinely fair,
(With purple fillets round her braided hair,)
Observed her entering; her soft hand she press'd,
And, smiling, thus the watery queen address'd:

"What, goddess! this unusual favour draws?
All hail, and welcome! whatsoe'er the cause;
Till now a stranger, in a happy hour
Approach, and taste the dainties of the bower."

High on a throne, with stars of silver graced,
And various artifice, the queen she placed;
A footstool at her feet: then calling, said,
"Vulcan, draw near, 'tis Thetis asks your aid."
"Thetis (replied the god) our powers may claim,
An ever-dear, an ever-honour'd name!
When my proud mother hurl'd me from the sky,
(My awkward form, it seems, displeased her eye,)
She, and Eurynome, my griefs redress'd,
And soft received me on their silver breast.
Even then these arts employ'd my infant thought:
Chains, bracelets, pendants, all their toys, I wrought.
Nine years kept secret in the dark abode,
Secure I lay, conceal'd from man and god:
Deep in a cavern'd rock my days were led;
The rushing ocean murmur'd o'er my head.
Now, since her presence glads our mansion, say,
For such desert what service can I pay?
Vouchsafe, O Thetis! at our board to share
The genial rites, and hospitable fare;
While I the labours of the forge forego,
And bid the roaring bellows cease to blow."

Then from his anvil the lame artist rose;
Wide with distorted legs oblique he goes,
And stills the bellows, and (in order laid)
Locks in their chests his instruments of trade.
Then with a sponge the sooty workman dress'd
His brawny arms embrown'd, and hairy breast.
With his huge sceptre graced, and red attire,
Came halting forth the sovereign of the fire:
The monarch's steps two female forms uphold,
That moved and breathed in animated gold;
To whom was voice, and sense, and science given
Of works divine (such wonders are in heaven!)
On these supported, with unequal gait,
He reach'd the throne where pensive Thetis sate;
There placed beside her on the shining frame,
He thus address'd the silver-footed dame:

"Thee, welcome, goddess! what occasion calls
(So long a stranger) to these honour'd walls?
'Tis thine, fair Thetis, the command to lay,
And Vulcan's joy and duty to obey."

To whom the mournful mother thus replies:
(The crystal drops stood trembling in her eyes:)
"O Vulcan! say, was ever breast divine
So pierced with sorrows, so o'erwhelm'd as mine?
Of all the goddesses, did Jove prepare
For Thetis only such a weight of care?
I, only I, of all the watery race
By force subjected to a man's embrace,
Who, sinking now with age and sorrow, pays
The mighty fine imposed on length of days.
Sprung from my bed, a godlike hero came,
The bravest sure that ever bore the name;
Like some fair plant beneath my careful hand
He grew, he flourish'd, and he graced the land:
To Troy I sent him! but his native shore
Never, ah never, shall receive him more;
(Even while he lives, he wastes with secret woe;)
Nor I, a goddess, can retard the blow!
Robb'd of the prize the Grecian suffrage gave,
The king of nations forced his royal slave:
For this he grieved; and, till the Greeks oppress'd
Required his arm, he sorrow'd unredress'd.
Large gifts they promise, and their elders send;
In vain--he arms not, but permits his friend
His arms, his steeds, his forces to employ:
He marches, combats, almost conquers Troy:
Then slain by Phoebus (Hector had the name)
At once resigns his armour, life, and fame.
But thou, in pity, by my prayer be won:
Grace with immortal arms this short-lived son,
And to the field in martial pomp restore,
To shine with glory, till he shines no more!"

To her the artist-god: "Thy griefs resign,
Secure, what Vulcan can, is ever thine.
O could I hide him from the Fates, as well,
Or with these hands the cruel stroke repel,
As I shall forge most envied arms, the gaze
Of wondering ages, and the world's amaze!"

Thus having said, the father of the fires
To the black labours of his forge retires.
Soon as he bade them blow, the bellows turn'd
Their iron mouths; and where the furnace burn'd,
Resounding breathed: at once the blast expires,
And twenty forges catch at once the fires;
Just as the god directs, now loud, now low,
They raise a tempest, or they gently blow;
In hissing flames huge silver bars are roll'd,
And stubborn brass, and tin, and solid gold;
Before, deep fix'd, the eternal anvils stand;
The ponderous hammer loads his better hand,
His left with tongs turns the vex'd metal round,
And thick, strong strokes, the doubling vaults rebound.

Then first he form'd the immense and solid shield;
Rich various artifice emblazed the field;
Its utmost verge a threefold circle bound;
A silver chain suspends the massy round;
Five ample plates the broad expanse compose,
And godlike labours on the surface rose.
There shone the image of the master-mind:
There earth, there heaven, there ocean he design'd;
The unwearied sun, the moon completely round;
The starry lights that heaven's high convex crown'd;
The Pleiads, Hyads, with the northern team;
And great Orion's more refulgent beam;
To which, around the axle of the sky,
The Bear, revolving, points his golden eye,
Still shines exalted on the ethereal plain,
Nor bathes his blazing forehead in the main.

Two cities radiant on the shield appear,
The image one of peace, and one of war.
Here sacred pomp and genial feast delight,
And solemn dance, and hymeneal rite;
Along the street the new-made brides are led,
With torches flaming, to the nuptial bed:
The youthful dancers in a circle bound
To the soft flute, and cithern's silver sound:
Through the fair streets the matrons in a row
Stand in their porches, and enjoy the show.

There in the forum swarm a numerous train;
The subject of debate, a townsman slain:
One pleads the fine discharged, which one denied,
And bade the public and the laws decide:
The witness is produced on either hand:
For this, or that, the partial people stand:
The appointed heralds still the noisy bands,
And form a ring, with sceptres in their hands:
On seats of stone, within the sacred place,
The reverend elders nodded o'er the case;
Alternate, each the attesting sceptre took,
And rising solemn, each his sentence spoke
Two golden talents lay amidst, in sight,
The prize of him who best adjudged the right.

Another part (a prospect differing far)
Glow'd with refulgent arms, and horrid war.
Two mighty hosts a leaguer'd town embrace,
And one would pillage, one would burn the place.
Meantime the townsmen, arm'd with silent care,
A secret ambush on the foe prepare:
Their wives, their children, and the watchful band
Of trembling parents, on the turrets stand.
They march; by Pallas and by Mars made bold:
Gold were the gods, their radiant garments gold,
And gold their armour: these the squadron led,
August, divine, superior by the head!
A place for ambush fit they found, and stood,
Cover'd with shields, beside a silver flood.
Two spies at distance lurk, and watchful seem
If sheep or oxen seek the winding stream.
Soon the white flocks proceeded o'er the plains,
And steers slow-moving, and two shepherd swains;
Behind them piping on their reeds they go,
Nor fear an ambush, nor suspect a foe.
In arms the glittering squadron rising round
Rush sudden; hills of slaughter heap the ground;
Whole flocks and herds lie bleeding on the plains,
And, all amidst them, dead, the shepherd swains!
The bellowing oxen the besiegers hear;
They rise, take horse, approach, and meet the war,
They fight, they fall, beside the silver flood;
The waving silver seem'd to blush with blood.
There Tumult, there Contention stood confess'd;
One rear'd a dagger at a captive's breast;
One held a living foe, that freshly bled
With new-made wounds; another dragg'd a dead;
Now here, now there, the carcases they tore:
Fate stalk'd amidst them, grim with human gore.
And the whole war came out, and met the eye;
And each bold figure seem'd to live or die.

A field deep furrow'd next the god design'd,
The third time labour'd by the sweating hind;
The shining shares full many ploughmen guide,
And turn their crooked yokes on every side.
Still as at either end they wheel around,
The master meets them with his goblet crown'd;
The hearty draught rewards, renews their toil,
Then back the turning ploughshares cleave the soil:
Behind, the rising earth in ridges roll'd;
And sable look'd, though form'd of molten gold.

Another field rose high with waving grain;
With bended sickles stand the reaper train:
Here stretched in ranks the levell'd swarths are found,
Sheaves heap'd on sheaves here thicken up the ground.
With sweeping stroke the mowers strow the lands;
The gatherers follow, and collect in bands;
And last the children, in whose arms are borne
(Too short to gripe them) the brown sheaves of corn.
The rustic monarch of the field descries,
With silent glee, the heaps around him rise.
A ready banquet on the turf is laid,
Beneath an ample oak's expanded shade.
The victim ox the sturdy youth prepare;
The reaper's due repast, the woman's care.

Next, ripe in yellow gold, a vineyard shines,
Bent with the ponderous harvest of its vines;
A deeper dye the dangling clusters show,
And curl'd on silver props, in order glow:
A darker metal mix'd intrench'd the place;
And pales of glittering tin the inclosure grace.
To this, one pathway gently winding leads,
Where march a train with baskets on their heads,
(Fair maids and blooming youths,) that smiling bear
The purple product of the autumnal year.
To these a youth awakes the warbling strings,
Whose tender lay the fate of Linus sings;
In measured dance behind him move the train,
Tune soft the voice, and answer to the strain.

Here herds of oxen march, erect and bold,
Rear high their horns, and seem to low in gold,
And speed to meadows on whose sounding shores
A rapid torrent through the rushes roars:
Four golden herdsmen as their guardians stand,
And nine sour dogs complete the rustic band.
Two lions rushing from the wood appear'd;
And seized a bull, the master of the herd:
He roar'd: in vain the dogs, the men withstood;
They tore his flesh, and drank his sable blood.
The dogs (oft cheer'd in vain) desert the prey,
Dread the grim terrors, and at distance bay.

Next this, the eye the art of Vulcan leads
Deep through fair forests, and a length of meads,
And stalls, and folds, and scatter'd cots between;
And fleecy flocks, that whiten all the scene.

A figured dance succeeds; such once was seen
In lofty Gnossus for the Cretan queen,
Form'd by Daedalean art; a comely band
Of youths and maidens, bounding hand in hand.
The maids in soft simars of linen dress'd;
The youths all graceful in the glossy vest:
Of those the locks with flowery wreath inroll'd;
Of these the sides adorn'd with swords of gold,
That glittering gay, from silver belts depend.
Now all at once they rise, at once descend,
With well-taught feet: now shape in oblique ways,
Confusedly regular, the moving maze:
Now forth at once, too swift for sight, they spring,
And undistinguish'd blend the flying ring:
So whirls a wheel, in giddy circle toss'd,
And, rapid as it runs, the single spokes are lost.
The gazing multitudes admire around:
Two active tumblers in the centre bound;
Now high, now low, their pliant limbs they bend:
And general songs the sprightly revel end.

Thus the broad shield complete the artist crown'd
With his last hand, and pour'd the ocean round:
In living silver seem'd the waves to roll,
And beat the buckler's verge, and bound the whole.

This done, whate'er a warrior's use requires
He forged; the cuirass that outshone the fires,
The greaves of ductile tin, the helm impress'd
With various sculpture, and the golden crest.
At Thetis' feet the finished labour lay:
She, as a falcon cuts the aerial way,
Swift from Olympus' snowy summit flies,
And bears the blazing present through the skies.

Soon as Aurora heaved her Orient head
Above the waves, that blush'd with early red,
(With new-born day to gladden mortal sight,
And gild the courts of heaven with sacred light,)
The immortal arms the goddess-mother bears
Swift to her son: her son she finds in tears
Stretch'd o'er Patroclus' corse; while all the rest
Their sovereign's sorrows in their own express'd.
A ray divine her heavenly presence shed,
And thus, his hand soft touching, Thetis said:

"Suppress, my son, this rage of grief, and know
It was not man, but heaven, that gave the blow;
Behold what arms by Vulcan are bestow'd,
Arms worthy thee, or fit to grace a god."

Then drops the radiant burden on the ground;
Clang the strong arms, and ring the shores around;
Back shrink the Myrmidons with dread surprise,
And from the broad effulgence turn their eyes.
Unmoved the hero kindles at the show,
And feels with rage divine his bosom glow;
From his fierce eyeballs living flames expire,
And flash incessant like a stream of fire:
He turns the radiant gift: and feeds his mind
On all the immortal artist had design'd.

"Goddess! (he cried,) these glorious arms, that shine
With matchless art, confess the hand divine.
Now to the bloody battle let me bend:
But ah! the relics of my slaughter'd friend!
In those wide wounds through which his spirit fled,
Shall flies, and worms obscene, pollute the dead?"

"That unavailing care be laid aside,
(The azure goddess to her son replied,)
Whole years untouch'd, uninjured shall remain,
Fresh as in life, the carcase of the slain.
But go, Achilles, as affairs require,
Before the Grecian peers renounce thine ire:
Then uncontroll'd in boundless war engage,
And heaven with strength supply the mighty rage!"

Then in the nostrils of the slain she pour'd
Nectareous drops, and rich ambrosia shower'd
O'er all the corse. The flies forbid their prey,
Untouch'd it rests, and sacred from decay.
Achilles to the strand obedient went:
The shores resounded with the voice he sent.
The heroes heard, and all the naval train
That tend the ships, or guide them o'er the main,
Alarm'd, transported, at the well-known sound,
Frequent and full, the great assembly crown'd;
Studious to see the terror of the plain,
Long lost to battle, shine in arms again.
Tydides and Ulysses first appear,
Lame with their wounds, and leaning on the spear;
These on the sacred seats of council placed,
The king of men, Atrides, came the last:
He too sore wounded by Agenor's son.
Achilles (rising in the midst) begun:

"O monarch! better far had been the fate
Of thee, of me, of all the Grecian state,
If (ere the day when by mad passion sway'd,
Rash we contended for the black-eyed maid)
Preventing Dian had despatch'd her dart,
And shot the shining mischief to the heart!
Then many a hero had not press'd the shore,
Nor Troy's glad fields been fatten'd with our gore.
Long, long shall Greece the woes we caused bewail,
And sad posterity repeat the tale.
But this, no more the subject of debate,
Is past, forgotten, and resign'd to fate.
Why should, alas, a mortal man, as I,
Burn with a fury that can never die?
Here then my anger ends: let war succeed,
And even as Greece has bled, let Ilion bleed.
Now call the hosts, and try if in our sight
Troy yet shall dare to camp a second night!
I deem, their mightiest, when this arm he knows,
Shall 'scape with transport, and with joy repose."

He said: his finish'd wrath with loud acclaim
The Greeks accept, and shout Pelides' name.
When thus, not rising from his lofty throne,
In state unmoved, the king of men begun:

"Hear me, ye sons of Greece! with silence hear!
And grant your monarch an impartial ear:
Awhile your loud, untimely joy suspend,
And let your rash, injurious clamours end:
Unruly murmurs, or ill-timed applause,
Wrong the best speaker, and the justest cause.
Nor charge on me, ye Greeks, the dire debate:
Know, angry Jove, and all-compelling Fate,
With fell Erinnys, urged my wrath that day
When from Achilles' arms I forced the prey.
What then could I against the will of heaven?
Not by myself, but vengeful Ate driven;
She, Jove's dread daughter, fated to infest
The race of mortals, enter'd in my breast.
Not on the ground that haughty fury treads,
But prints her lofty footsteps on the heads
Of mighty men; inflicting as she goes
Long-festering wounds, inextricable woes!
Of old, she stalk'd amid the bright abodes;
And Jove himself, the sire of men and gods,
The world's great ruler, felt her venom'd dart;
Deceived by Juno's wiles, and female art:
For when Alcmena's nine long months were run,
And Jove expected his immortal son,
To gods and goddesses the unruly joy
He show'd, and vaunted of his matchless boy:
'From us, (he said) this day an infant springs,
Fated to rule, and born a king of kings.'
Saturnia ask'd an oath, to vouch the truth,
And fix dominion on the favour'd youth.
The Thunderer, unsuspicious of the fraud,
Pronounced those solemn words that bind a god.
The joyful goddess, from Olympus' height,
Swift to Achaian Argos bent her flight:
Scarce seven moons gone, lay Sthenelus's wife;
She push'd her lingering infant into life:
Her charms Alcmena's coming labours stay,
And stop the babe, just issuing to the day.
Then bids Saturnius bear his oath in mind;
'A youth (said she) of Jove's immortal kind
Is this day born: from Sthenelus he springs,
And claims thy promise to be king of kings.'
Grief seized the Thunderer, by his oath engaged;
Stung to the soul, he sorrow'd, and he raged.
From his ambrosial head, where perch'd she sate,
He snatch'd the fury-goddess of debate,
The dread, the irrevocable oath he swore,
The immortal seats should ne'er behold her more;
And whirl'd her headlong down, for ever driven
From bright Olympus and the starry heaven:
Thence on the nether world the fury fell;
Ordain'd with man's contentious race to dwell.
Full oft the god his son's hard toils bemoan'd,
Cursed the dire fury, and in secret groan'd.
Even thus, like Jove himself, was I misled,
While raging Hector heap'd our camps with dead.
What can the errors of my rage atone?
My martial troops, my treasures are thy own:
This instant from the navy shall be sent
Whate'er Ulysses promised at thy tent:
But thou! appeased, propitious to our prayer,
Resume thy arms, and shine again in war."

" O king of nations! whose superior sway
(Returns Achilles) all our hosts obey!
To keep or send the presents, be thy care;
To us, 'tis equal: all we ask is war.
While yet we talk, or but an instant shun
The fight, our glorious work remains undone.
Let every Greek, who sees my spear confound
The Trojan ranks, and deal destruction round,
With emulation, what I act survey,
And learn from thence the business of the day.

The son of Peleus thus; and thus replies
The great in councils, Ithacus the wise:
"Though, godlike, thou art by no toils oppress'd,
At least our armies claim repast and rest:
Long and laborious must the combat be,
When by the gods inspired, and led by thee.
Strength is derived from spirits and from blood,
And those augment by generous wine and food:
What boastful son of war, without that stay,
Can last a hero through a single day?
Courage may prompt; but, ebbing out his strength,
Mere unsupported man must yield at length;
Shrunk with dry famine, and with toils declined,
The drooping body will desert the mind:
But built anew with strength-conferring fare,
With limbs and soul untamed, he tires a war.
Dismiss the people, then, and give command.
With strong repast to hearten every band;
But let the presents to Achilles made,
In full assembly of all Greece be laid.
The king of men shall rise in public sight,
And solemn swear (observant of the rite)
That, spotless, as she came, the maid removes,
Pure from his arms, and guiltless of his loves.
That done, a sumptuous banquet shall be made,
And the full price of injured honour paid.
Stretch not henceforth, O prince.! thy sovereign might
Beyond the bounds of reason and of right;
'Tis the chief praise that e'er to kings belong'd,
To right with justice whom with power they wrong'd."

To him the monarch: "Just is thy decree,
Thy words give joy, and wisdom breathes in thee.
Each due atonement gladly I prepare;
And heaven regard me as I justly swear!
Here then awhile let Greece assembled stay,
Nor great Achilles grudge this short delay.
Till from the fleet our presents be convey'd,
And Jove attesting, the firm compact made.
A train of noble youths the charge shall bear;
These to select, Ulysses, be thy care:
In order rank'd let all our gifts appear,
And the fair train of captives close the rear:
Talthybius shall the victim boar convey,
Sacred to Jove, and yon bright orb of day."

"For this (the stern acides replies)
Some less important season may suffice,
When the stern fury of the war is o'er,
And wrath, extinguish'd, burns my breast no more.
By Hector slain, their faces to the sky,
All grim with gaping wounds, our heroes lie:
Those call to war! and might my voice incite,
Now, now, this instant, shall commence the fight:
Then, when the day's complete, let generous bowls,
And copious banquets, glad your weary souls.
Let not my palate know the taste of food,
Till my insatiate rage be cloy'd with blood:
Pale lies my friend, with wounds disfigured o'er,
And his cold feet are pointed to the door.
Revenge is all my soul! no meaner care,
Interest, or thought, has room to harbour there;
Destruction be my feast, and mortal wounds,
And scenes of blood, and agonizing sounds."

"O first of Greeks, (Ulysses thus rejoin'd,)
The best and bravest of the warrior kind!
Thy praise it is in dreadful camps to shine,
But old experience and calm wisdom mine.
Then hear my counsel, and to reason yield,
The bravest soon are satiate of the field;
Though vast the heaps that strow the crimson plain,
The bloody harvest brings but little gain:
The scale of conquest ever wavering lies,
Great Jove but turns it, and the victor dies!
The great, the bold, by thousands daily fall,
And endless were the grief, to weep for all.
Eternal sorrows what avails to shed?
Greece honours not with solemn fasts the dead:
Enough, when death demands the brave, to pay
The tribute of a melancholy day.
One chief with patience to the grave resign'd,
Our care devolves on others left behind.
Let generous food supplies of strength produce,
Let rising spirits flow from sprightly juice,
Let their warm heads with scenes of battle glow,
And pour new furies on the feebler foe.
Yet a short interval, and none shall dare
Expect a second summons to the war;
Who waits for that, the dire effects shall find,
If trembling in the ships he lags behind.
Embodied, to the battle let us bend,
And all at once on haughty Troy descend."

And now the delegates Ulysses sent,
To bear the presents from the royal tent:
The sons of Nestor, Phyleus' valiant heir,
Thias and Merion, thunderbolts of war,
With Lycomedes of Creiontian strain,
And Melanippus, form'd the chosen train.
Swift as the word was given, the youths obey'd:
Twice ten bright vases in the midst they laid;
A row of six fair tripods then succeeds;
And twice the number of high-bounding steeds:
Seven captives next a lovely line compose;
The eighth Briseis, like the blooming rose,
Closed the bright band: great Ithacus, before,
First of the train, the golden talents bore:
The rest in public view the chiefs dispose,
A splendid scene! then Agamemnon rose:
The boar Talthybius held: the Grecian lord
Drew the broad cutlass sheath'd beside his sword:
The stubborn bristles from the victim's brow
He crops, and offering meditates his vow.
His hands uplifted to the attesting skies,
On heaven's broad marble roof were fixed his eyes.
The solemn words a deep attention draw,
And Greece around sat thrill'd with sacred awe.

"Witness thou first! thou greatest power above,
All-good, all-wise, and all-surveying Jove!
And mother-earth, and heaven's revolving light,
And ye, fell furies of the realms of night,
Who rule the dead, and horrid woes prepare
For perjured kings, and all who falsely swear!
The black-eyed maid inviolate removes,
Pure and unconscious of my manly loves.
If this be false, heaven all its vengeance shed,
And levell'd thunder strike my guilty head!"

With that, his weapon deep inflicts the wound;
The bleeding savage tumbles to the ground;
The sacred herald rolls the victim slain
(A feast for fish) into the foaming main.

Then thus Achilles: "Hear, ye Greeks! and know
Whate'er we feel, 'tis Jove inflicts the woe;
Not else Atrides could our rage inflame,
Nor from my arms, unwilling, force the dame.
'Twas Jove's high will alone, o'erruling all,
That doom'd our strife, and doom'd the Greeks to fall.
Go then, ye chiefs! indulge the genial rite;
Achilles waits ye, and expects the fight."

The speedy council at his word adjourn'd:
To their black vessels all the Greeks return'd.
Achilles sought his tent. His train before
March'd onward, bending with the gifts they bore.
Those in the tents the squires industrious spread:
The foaming coursers to the stalls they led;
To their new seats the female captives move
Briseis, radiant as the queen of love,
Slow as she pass'd, beheld with sad survey
Where, gash'd with cruel wounds, Patroclus lay.
Prone on the body fell the heavenly fair,
Beat her sad breast, and tore her golden hair;
All beautiful in grief, her humid eyes
Shining with tears she lifts, and thus she cries:

"Ah, youth for ever dear, for ever kind,
Once tender friend of my distracted mind!
I left thee fresh in life, in beauty gay;
Now find thee cold, inanimated clay!
What woes my wretched race of life attend!
Sorrows on sorrows, never doom'd to end!
The first loved consort of my virgin bed
Before these eyes in fatal battle bled:
My three brave brothers in one mournful day
All trod the dark, irremeable way:
Thy friendly hand uprear'd me from the plain,
And dried my sorrows for a husband slain;
Achilles' care you promised I should prove,
The first, the dearest partner of his love;
That rites divine should ratify the band,
And make me empress in his native land.
Accept these grateful tears! for thee they flow,
For thee, that ever felt another's woe!"

Her sister captives echoed groan for groan,
Nor mourn'd Patroclus' fortunes, but their own.
The leaders press'd the chief on every side;
Unmoved he heard them, and with sighs denied.

"If yet Achilles have a friend, whose care
Is bent to please him, this request forbear;
Till yonder sun descend, ah, let me pay
To grief and anguish one abstemious day."

He spoke, and from the warriors turn'd his face:
Yet still the brother-kings of Atreus' race,
Nestor, Idomeneus, Ulysses sage,
And Phoenix, strive to calm his grief and rage:
His rage they calm not, nor his grief control;
He groans, he raves, he sorrows from his soul.

"Thou too, Patroclus! (thus his heart he vents)
Once spread the inviting banquet in our tents:
Thy sweet society, thy winning care,
Once stay'd Achilles, rushing to the war.
But now, alas! to death's cold arms resign'd,
What banquet but revenge can glad my mind?
What greater sorrow could afflict my breast,
What more if hoary Peleus were deceased?
Who now, perhaps, in Phthia dreads to hear
His son's sad fate, and drops a tender tear.
What more, should Neoptolemus the brave,
My only offspring, sink into the grave?
If yet that offspring lives; (I distant far,
Of all neglectful, wage a hateful war.)
I could not this, this cruel stroke attend;
Fate claim'd Achilles, but might spare his friend.
I hoped Patroclus might survive, to rear
My tender orphan with a parent's care,
From Scyros' isle conduct him o'er the main,
And glad his eyes with his paternal reign,
The lofty palace, and the large domain.
For Peleus breathes no more the vital air;
Or drags a wretched life of age and care,
But till the news of my sad fate invades
His hastening soul, and sinks him to the shades."

Sighing he said: his grief the heroes join'd,
Each stole a tear for what he left behind.
Their mingled grief the sire of heaven survey'd,
And thus with pity to his blue-eyed maid:

"Is then Achilles now no more thy care,
And dost thou thus desert the great in war?
Lo, where yon sails their canvas wings extend,
All comfortless he sits, and wails his friend:
Ere thirst and want his forces have oppress'd,
Haste and infuse ambrosia in his breast."

He spoke; and sudden, at the word of Jove,
Shot the descending goddess from above.
So swift through ether the shrill harpy springs,
The wide air floating to her ample wings,
To great Achilles she her flight address'd,
And pour'd divine ambrosia in his breast,
With nectar sweet, (refection of the gods!)
Then, swift ascending, sought the bright abodes.

Now issued from the ships the warrior-train,
And like a deluge pour'd upon the plain.
As when the piercing blasts of Boreas blow,
And scatter o'er the fields the driving snow;
From dusky clouds the fleecy winter flies,
Whose dazzling lustre whitens all the skies:
So helms succeeding helms, so shields from shields,
Catch the quick beams, and brighten all the fields;
Broad glittering breastplates, spears with pointed rays,
Mix in one stream, reflecting blaze on blaze;
Thick beats the centre as the coursers bound;
With splendour flame the skies, and laugh the fields around,

Full in the midst, high-towering o'er the rest,
His limbs in arms divine Achilles dress'd;
Arms which the father of the fire bestow'd,
Forged on the eternal anvils of the god.
Grief and revenge his furious heart inspire,
His glowing eyeballs roll with living fire;
He grinds his teeth, and furious with delay
O'erlooks the embattled host, and hopes the bloody day.

The silver cuishes first his thighs infold;
Then o'er his breast was braced the hollow gold;
The brazen sword a various baldric tied,
That, starr'd with gems, hung glittering at his side;
And, like the moon, the broad refulgent shield
Blazed with long rays, and gleam'd athwart the field.

So to night-wandering sailors, pale with fears,
Wide o'er the watery waste, a light appears,
Which on the far-seen mountain blazing high,
Streams from some lonely watch-tower to the sky:
With mournful eyes they gaze, and gaze again;
Loud howls the storm, and drives them o'er the main.

Next, his high head the helmet graced; behind
The sweepy crest hung floating in the wind:
Like the red star, that from his flaming hair
Shakes down diseases, pestilence, and war;
So stream'd the golden honours from his head,
Trembled the sparkling plumes, and the loose glories shed.
The chief beholds himself with wondering eyes;
His arms he poises, and his motions tries;
Buoy'd by some inward force, he seems to swim,
And feels a pinion lifting every limb.

And now he shakes his great paternal spear,
Ponderous and huge, which not a Greek could rear,
From Pelion's cloudy top an ash entire
Old Chiron fell'd, and shaped it for his sire;
A spear which stern Achilles only wields,
The death of heroes, and the dread of fields.

Automedon and Alcimus prepare
The immortal coursers, and the radiant car;
(The silver traces sweeping at their side;)
Their fiery mouths resplendent bridles tied;
The ivory-studded reins, return'd behind,
Waved o'er their backs, and to the chariot join'd.
The charioteer then whirl'd the lash around,
And swift ascended at one active bound.
All bright in heavenly arms, above his squire
Achilles mounts, and sets the field on fire;
Not brighter Phoebus in the ethereal way
Flames from his chariot, and restores the day.
High o'er the host, all terrible he stands,
And thunders to his steeds these dread commands:

"Xanthus and Balius! of Podarges' strain,
(Unless ye boast that heavenly race in vain,)
Be swift, be mindful of the load ye bear,
And learn to make your master more your care:
Through falling squadrons bear my slaughtering sword,
Nor, as ye left Patroclus, leave your lord."

The generous Xanthus, as the words he said,
Seem'd sensible of woe, and droop'd his head:
Trembling he stood before the golden wain,
And bow'd to dust the honours of his mane.
When, strange to tell! (so Juno will'd) he broke
Eternal silence, and portentous spoke.
"Achilles! yes! this day at least we bear
Thy rage in safety through the files of war:
But come it will, the fatal time must come,
Not ours the fault, but God decrees thy doom.
Not through our crime, or slowness in the course,
Fell thy Patroclus, but by heavenly force;
The bright far-shooting god who gilds the day
(Confess'd we saw him) tore his arms way.
No--could our swiftness o'er the winds prevail,
Or beat the pinions of the western gale,
All were in vain--the Fates thy death demand,
Due to a mortal and immortal hand."

Then ceased for ever, by the Furies tied,
His fateful voice. The intrepid chief replied
With unabated rage--"So let it be!
Portents and prodigies are lost on me.
I know my fate: to die, to see no more
My much-loved parents, and my native shore--
Enough--when heaven ordains, I sink in night:
Now perish Troy!" He said, and rush'd to fight.

Thus round Pelides breathing war and blood
Greece, sheathed in arms, beside her vessels stood;
While near impending from a neighbouring height,
Troy's black battalions wait the shock of fight.
Then Jove to Themis gives command, to call
The gods to council in the starry hall:
Swift o'er Olympus' hundred hills she flies,
And summons all the senate of the skies.
These shining on, in long procession come
To Jove's eternal adamantine dome.
Not one was absent, not a rural power
That haunts the verdant gloom, or rosy bower;
Each fair-hair'd dryad of the shady wood,
Each azure sister of the silver flood;
All but old Ocean, hoary sire! who keeps
His ancient seat beneath the sacred deeps.
On marble thrones, with lucid columns crown'd,
(The work of Vulcan,) sat the powers around.
Even he whose trident sways the watery reign
Heard the loud summons, and forsook the main,
Assumed his throne amid the bright abodes,
And question'd thus the sire of men and gods:

"What moves the god who heaven and earth commands,
And grasps the thunder in his awful hands,
Thus to convene the whole ethereal state?
Is Greece and Troy the subject in debate?
Already met, the louring hosts appear,
And death stands ardent on the edge of war."

"'Tis true (the cloud-compelling power replies)
This day we call the council of the skies
In care of human race; even Jove's own eye
Sees with regret unhappy mortals die.
Far on Olympus' top in secret state
Ourself will sit, and see the hand of fate
Work out our will. Celestial powers! descend,
And as your minds direct, your succour lend
To either host. Troy soon must lie o'erthrown,
If uncontroll'd Achilles fights alone:
Their troops but lately durst not meet his eyes;
What can they now, if in his rage he rise?
Assist them, gods! or Ilion's sacred wall
May fall this day, though fate forbids the fall."

He said, and fired their heavenly breasts with rage.
On adverse parts the warring gods engage:
Heaven's awful queen; and he whose azure round
Girds the vast globe; the maid in arms renown'd;
Hermes, of profitable arts the sire;
And Vulcan, the black sovereign of the fire:
These to the fleet repair with instant flight;
The vessels tremble as the gods alight.
In aid of Troy, Latona, Phoebus came,
Mars fiery-helm'd, the laughter-loving dame,
Xanthus, whose streams in golden currents flow,
And the chaste huntress of the silver bow.
Ere yet the gods their various aid employ,
Each Argive bosom swell'd with manly joy,
While great Achilles (terror of the plain),
Long lost to battle, shone in arms again.
Dreadful he stood in front of all his host;
Pale Troy beheld, and seem'd already lost;
Her bravest heroes pant with inward fear,
And trembling see another god of war.

But when the powers descending swell'd the fight,
Then tumult rose: fierce rage and pale affright
Varied each face: then Discord sounds alarms,
Earth echoes, and the nations rush to arms.
Now through the trembling shores Minerva calls,
And now she thunders from the Grecian walls.
Mars hovering o'er his Troy, his terror shrouds
In gloomy tempests, and a night of clouds:
Now through each Trojan heart he fury pours
With voice divine, from Ilion's topmost towers:
Now shouts to Simois, from her beauteous hill;
The mountain shook, the rapid stream stood still.

Above, the sire of gods his thunder rolls,
And peals on peals redoubled rend the poles.
Beneath, stern Neptune shakes the solid ground;
The forests wave, the mountains nod around;
Through all their summits tremble Ida's woods,
And from their sources boil her hundred floods.
Troy's turrets totter on the rocking plain,
And the toss'd navies beat the heaving main.
Deep in the dismal regions of the dead,
The infernal monarch rear'd his horrid head,
Leap'd from his throne, lest Neptune's arm should lay
His dark dominions open to the day,
And pour in light on Pluto's drear abodes,
Abhorr'd by men, and dreadful even to gods.

Such war the immortals wage; such horrors rend
The world's vast concave, when the gods contend
First silver-shafted Phoebus took the plain
Against blue Neptune, monarch of the main.
The god of arms his giant bulk display'd,
Opposed to Pallas, war's triumphant maid.
Against Latona march'd the son of May.
The quiver'd Dian, sister of the day,
(Her golden arrows sounding at her side,)
Saturnia, majesty of heaven, defied.
With fiery Vulcan last in battle stands
The sacred flood that rolls on golden sands;
Xanthus his name with those of heavenly birth,
But called Scamander by the sons of earth.

While thus the gods in various league engage,
Achilles glow'd with more than mortal rage:
Hector he sought; in search of Hector turn'd
His eyes around, for Hector only burn'd;
And burst like lightning through the ranks, and vow'd
To glut the god of battles with his blood.

neas was the first who dared to stay;
Apollo wedged him in the warrior's way,
But swell'd his bosom with undaunted might,
Half-forced and half-persuaded to the fight.
Like young Lycaon, of the royal line,
In voice and aspect, seem'd the power divine;
And bade the chief reflect, how late with scorn
In distant threats he braved the goddess-born.

Then thus the hero of Anchises' strain:
"To meet Pelides you persuade in vain:
Already have I met, nor void of fear
Observed the fury of his flying spear;
From Ida's woods he chased us to the field,
Our force he scattered, and our herds he kill'd;
Lyrnessus, Pedasus in ashes lay;
But (Jove assisting) I survived the day:
Else had I sunk oppress'd in fatal fight
By fierce Achilles and Minerva's might.
Where'er he moved, the goddess shone before,
And bathed his brazen lance in hostile gore.
What mortal man Achilles can sustain?
The immortals guard him through the dreadful plain,
And suffer not his dart to fall in vain.
Were God my aid, this arm should check his power,
Though strong in battle as a brazen tower."

To whom the son of Jove: "That god implore,
And be what great Achilles was before.
From heavenly Venus thou deriv'st thy strain,
And he but from a sister of the main;
An aged sea-god father of his line;
But Jove himself the sacred source of thine.
Then lift thy weapon for a noble blow,
Nor fear the vaunting of a mortal foe."

This said, and spirit breathed into his breast,
Through the thick troops the embolden'd hero press'd:
His venturous act the white-arm'd queen survey'd,
And thus, assembling all the powers, she said:

"Behold an action, gods! that claims your care,
Lo great neas rushing to the war!
Against Pelides he directs his course,
Phoebus impels, and Phoebus gives him force.
Restrain his bold career; at least, to attend
Our favour'd hero, let some power descend.
To guard his life, and add to his renown,
We, the great armament of heaven, came down.
Hereafter let him fall, as Fates design,
That spun so short his life's illustrious line:
But lest some adverse god now cross his way,
Give him to know what powers assist this day:
For how shall mortal stand the dire alarms,
When heaven's refulgent host appear in arms?"

Thus she; and thus the god whose force can make
The solid globe's eternal basis shake:
"Against the might of man, so feeble known,
Why should celestial powers exert their own?
Suffice from yonder mount to view the scene,
And leave to war the fates of mortal men.
But if the armipotent, or god of light,
Obstruct Achilles, or commence the fight.
Thence on the gods of Troy we swift descend:
Full soon, I doubt not, shall the conflict end;
And these, in ruin and confusion hurl'd,
Yield to our conquering arms the lower world."

Thus having said, the tyrant of the sea,
Coerulean Neptune, rose, and led the way.
Advanced upon the field there stood a mound
Of earth congested, wall'd, and trench'd around;
In elder times to guard Alcides made,
(The work of Trojans, with Minerva's aid,)
What time a vengeful monster of the main
Swept the wide shore, and drove him to the plain.

Here Neptune and the gods of Greece repair,
With clouds encompass'd, and a veil of air:
The adverse powers, around Apollo laid,
Crown the fair hills that silver Simois shade.
In circle close each heavenly party sat,
Intent to form the future scheme of fate;
But mix not yet in fight, though Jove on high
Gives the loud signal, and the heavens reply.

Meanwhile the rushing armies hide the ground;
The trampled centre yields a hollow sound:
Steeds cased in mail, and chiefs in armour bright,
The gleaming champaign glows with brazen light.
Amid both hosts (a dreadful space) appear,
There great Achilles; bold neas, here.
With towering strides Aeneas first advanced;
The nodding plumage on his helmet danced:
Spread o'er his breast the fencing shield he bore,
And, so he moved, his javelin flamed before.
Not so Pelides; furious to engage,
He rush'd impetuous. Such the lion's rage,
Who viewing first his foes with scornful eyes,
Though all in arms the peopled city rise,
Stalks careless on, with unregarding pride;
Till at the length, by some brave youth defied,
To his bold spear the savage turns alone,
He murmurs fury with a hollow groan;
He grins, he foams, he rolls his eyes around
Lash'd by his tail his heaving sides resound;
He calls up all his rage; he grinds his teeth,
Resolved on vengeance, or resolved on death.
So fierce Achilles on neas flies;
So stands neas, and his force defies.
Ere yet the stern encounter join'd, begun
The seed of Thetis thus to Venus' son:

"Why comes neas through the ranks so far?
Seeks he to meet Achilles' arm in war,
In hope the realms of Priam to enjoy,
And prove his merits to the throne of Troy?
Grant that beneath thy lance Achilles dies,
The partial monarch may refuse the prize;
Sons he has many; those thy pride may quell:
And 'tis his fault to love those sons too well,
Or, in reward of thy victorious hand,
Has Troy proposed some spacious tract of land
An ample forest, or a fair domain,
Of hills for vines, and arable for grain?
Even this, perhaps, will hardly prove thy lot.
But can Achilles be so soon forgot?
Once (as I think) you saw this brandish'd spear
And then the great neas seem'd to fear:
With hearty haste from Ida's mount he fled,
Nor, till he reach'd Lyrnessus, turn'd his head.
Her lofty walls not long our progress stay'd;
Those, Pallas, Jove, and we, in ruins laid:
In Grecian chains her captive race were cast;
'Tis true, the great Aeneas fled too fast.
Defrauded of my conquest once before,
What then I lost, the gods this day restore.
Go; while thou may'st, avoid the threaten'd fate;
Fools stay to feel it, and are wise too late."

To this Anchises' son: "Such words employ
To one that fears thee, some unwarlike boy;
Such we disdain; the best may be defied
With mean reproaches, and unmanly pride;
Unworthy the high race from which we came
Proclaim'd so loudly by the voice of fame:
Each from illustrious fathers draws his line;
Each goddess-born; half human, half divine.
Thetis' this day, or Venus' offspring dies,
And tears shall trickle from celestial eyes:
For when two heroes, thus derived, contend,
'Tis not in words the glorious strife can end.
If yet thou further seek to learn my birth
(A tale resounded through the spacious earth)
Hear how the glorious origin we prove
From ancient Dardanus, the first from Jove:
Dardania's walls he raised; for Ilion, then,
(The city since of many-languaged men,)
Was not. The natives were content to till
The shady foot of Ida's fountful hill.
From Dardanus great Erichthonius springs,
The richest, once, of Asia's wealthy kings;
Three thousand mares his spacious pastures bred,
Three thousand foals beside their mothers fed.
Boreas, enamour'd of the sprightly train,
Conceal'd his godhead in a flowing mane,
With voice dissembled to his loves he neigh'd,
And coursed the dappled beauties o'er the mead:
Hence sprung twelve others of unrivall'd kind,
Swift as their mother mares, and father wind.
These lightly skimming, when they swept the plain,
Nor plied the grass, nor bent the tender grain;
And when along the level seas they flew,
Scarce on the surface curl'd the briny dew.
Such Erichthonius was: from him there came
The sacred Tros, of whom the Trojan name.
Three sons renown'd adorn'd his nuptial bed,
Ilus, Assaracus, and Ganymed:
The matchless Ganymed, divinely fair,
Whom heaven, enamour'd, snatch'd to upper air,
To bear the cup of Jove (ethereal guest,
The grace and glory of the ambrosial feast).
The two remaining sons the line divide:
First rose Laomedon from Ilus' side;
From him Tithonus, now in cares grown old,
And Priam, bless'd with Hector, brave and bold;
Clytius and Lampus, ever-honour'd pair;
And Hicetaon, thunderbolt of war.
From great Assaracus sprang Capys, he
Begat Anchises, and Anchises me.
Such is our race: 'tis fortune gives us birth,
But Jove alone endues the soul with worth:
He, source of power and might! with boundless sway,
All human courage gives, or takes away.
Long in the field of words we may contend,
Reproach is infinite, and knows no end,
Arm'd or with truth or falsehood, right or wrong;
So voluble a weapon is the tongue;
Wounded, we wound; and neither side can fail,
For every man has equal strength to rail:
Women alone, when in the streets they jar,
Perhaps excel us in this wordy war;
Like us they stand, encompass'd with the crowd,
And vent their anger impotent and loud.
Cease then--Our business in the field of fight
Is not to question, but to prove our might.
To all those insults thou hast offer'd here,
Receive this answer: 'tis my flying spear."

He spoke. With all his force the javelin flung,
Fix'd deep, and loudly in the buckler rung.
Far on his outstretch'd arm, Pelides held
(To meet the thundering lance) his dreadful shield,
That trembled as it stuck; nor void of fear
Saw, ere it fell, the immeasurable spear.
His fears were vain; impenetrable charms
Secured the temper of the ethereal arms.
Through two strong plates the point its passage held,
But stopp'd, and rested, by the third repell'd.
Five plates of various metal, various mould,
Composed the shield; of brass each outward fold,
Of tin each inward, and the middle gold:
There stuck the lance. Then rising ere he threw,
The forceful spear of great Achilles flew,
And pierced the Dardan shield's extremest bound,
Where the shrill brass return'd a sharper sound:
Through the thin verge the Pelean weapon glides,
And the slight covering of expanded hides.
neas his contracted body bends,
And o'er him high the riven targe extends,
Sees, through its parting plates, the upper air,
And at his back perceives the quivering spear:
A fate so near him, chills his soul with fright;
And swims before his eyes the many-colour'd light.
Achilles, rushing in with dreadful cries,
Draws his broad blade, and at neas flies:
neas rousing as the foe came on,
With force collected, heaves a mighty stone:
A mass enormous! which in modern days
No two of earth's degenerate sons could raise.
But ocean's god, whose earthquakes rock the ground.
Saw the distress, and moved the powers around:

"Lo! on the brink of fate neas stands,
An instant victim to Achilles' hands;
By Phoebus urged; but Phoebus has bestow'd
His aid in vain: the man o'erpowers the god.
And can ye see this righteous chief atone
With guiltless blood for vices not his own?
To all the gods his constant vows were paid;
Sure, though he wars for Troy, he claims our aid.
Fate wills not this; nor thus can Jove resign
The future father of the Dardan line:
The first great ancestor obtain'd his grace,
And still his love descends on all the race:
For Priam now, and Priam's faithless kind,
At length are odious to the all-seeing mind;
On great neas shall devolve the reign,
And sons succeeding sons the lasting line sustain."

The great earth-shaker thus: to whom replies
The imperial goddess with the radiant eyes:
"Good as he is, to immolate or spare
The Dardan prince, O Neptune! be thy care;
Pallas and I, by all that gods can bind,
Have sworn destruction to the Trojan kind;
Not even an instant to protract their fate,
Or save one member of the sinking state;
Till her last flame be quench'd with her last gore,
And even her crumbling ruins are no more."

The king of ocean to the fight descends,
Through all the whistling darts his course he bends,
Swift interposed between the warrior flies,
And casts thick darkness o'er Achilles' eyes.
From great neas' shield the spear he drew,
And at his master's feet the weapon threw.
That done, with force divine he snatch'd on high
The Dardan prince, and bore him through the sky,
Smooth-gliding without step, above the heads
Of warring heroes, and of bounding steeds:
Till at the battle's utmost verge they light,
Where the slow Caucans close the rear of fight.
The godhead there (his heavenly form confess'd)
With words like these the panting chief address'd:

"What power, O prince! with force inferior far,
Urged thee to meet Achilles' arm in war?
Henceforth beware, nor antedate thy doom,
Defrauding fate of all thy fame to come.
But when the day decreed (for come it must)
Shall lay this dreadful hero in the dust,
Let then the furies of that arm be known,
Secure no Grecian force transcends thy own."

With that, he left him wondering as he lay,
Then from Achilles chased the mist away:
Sudden, returning with a stream of light,
The scene of war came rushing on his sight.
Then thus, amazed; "What wonders strike my mind!
My spear, that parted on the wings of wind,
Laid here before me! and the Dardan lord,
That fell this instant, vanish'd from my sword!
I thought alone with mortals to contend,
But powers celestial sure this foe defend.
Great as he is, our arms he scarce will try,
Content for once, with all his gods, to fly.
Now then let others bleed." This said, aloud
He vents his fury and inflames the crowd:
"O Greeks! (he cries, and every rank alarms)
Join battle, man to man, and arms to arms!
'Tis not in me, though favour'd by the sky,
To mow whole troops, and make whole armies fly:
No god can singly such a host engage,
Not Mars himself, nor great Minerva's rage.
But whatsoe'er Achilles can inspire,
Whate'er of active force, or acting fire;
Whate'er this heart can prompt, or hand obey;
All, all Achilles, Greeks! is yours to-day.
Through yon wide host this arm shall scatter fear,
And thin the squadrons with my single spear."

He said: nor less elate with martial joy,
The godlike Hector warm'd the troops of Troy:
"Trojans, to war! Think, Hector leads you on;
Nor dread the vaunts of Peleus' haughty son.
Deeds must decide our fate. E'en these with words
Insult the brave, who tremble at their swords:
The weakest atheist-wretch all heaven defies,
But shrinks and shudders when the thunder flies.
Nor from yon boaster shall your chief retire,
Not though his heart were steel, his hands were fire;
That fire, that steel, your Hector should withstand,
And brave that vengeful heart, that dreadful hand."

Thus (breathing rage through all) the hero said;
A wood of lances rises round his head,
Clamours on clamours tempest all the air,
They join, they throng, they thicken to the war.
But Phoebus warns him from high heaven to shun
The single fight with Thetis' godlike son;
More safe to combat in the mingled band,
Nor tempt too near the terrors of his hand.
He hears, obedient to the god of light,
And, plunged within the ranks, awaits the fight.

Then fierce Achilles, shouting to the skies,
On Troy's whole force with boundless fury flies.
First falls Iphytion, at his army's head;
Brave was the chief, and brave the host he led;
From great Otrynteus he derived his blood,
His mother was a Nais, of the flood;
Beneath the shades of Tmolus, crown'd with snow,
From Hyde's walls he ruled the lands below.
Fierce as he springs, the sword his head divides:
The parted visage falls on equal sides:
With loud-resounding arms he strikes the plain;
While thus Achilles glories o'er the slain:

"Lie there, Otryntides! the Trojan earth
Receives thee dead, though Gygae boast thy birth;
Those beauteous fields where Hyllus' waves are roll'd,
And plenteous Hermus swells with tides of gold,
Are thine no more."--The insulting hero said,
And left him sleeping in eternal shade.
The rolling wheels of Greece the body tore,
And dash'd their axles with no vulgar gore.

Demoleon next, Antenor's offspring, laid
Breathless in dust, the price of rashness paid.
The impatient steel with full-descending sway
Forced through his brazen helm its furious way,
Resistless drove the batter'd skull before,
And dash'd and mingled all the brains with gore.
This sees Hippodamas, and seized with fright,
Deserts his chariot for a swifter flight:
The lance arrests him: an ignoble wound
The panting Trojan rivets to the ground.
He groans away his soul: not louder roars,
At Neptune's shrine on Helice's high shores,
The victim bull; the rocks re-bellow round,
And ocean listens to the grateful sound.
Then fell on Polydore his vengeful rage,
The youngest hope of Priam's stooping age:
(Whose feet for swiftness in the race surpass'd:)
Of all his sons, the dearest, and the last.
To the forbidden field he takes his flight,
In the first folly of a youthful knight,
To vaunt his swiftness wheels around the plain,
But vaunts not long, with all his swiftness slain:
Struck where the crossing belts unite behind,
And golden rings the double back-plate join'd
Forth through the navel burst the thrilling steel;
And on his knees with piercing shrieks he fell;
The rushing entrails pour'd upon the ground
His hands collect; and darkness wraps him round.
When Hector view'd, all ghastly in his gore,
Thus sadly slain the unhappy Polydore,
A cloud of sorrow overcast his sight,
His soul no longer brook'd the distant fight:
Full in Achilles' dreadful front he came,
And shook his javelin like a waving flame.
The son of Peleus sees, with joy possess'd,
His heart high-bounding in his rising breast.
"And, lo! the man on whom black fates attend;
The man, that slew Achilles, is his friend!
No more shall Hector's and Pelides' spear
Turn from each other in the walks of war."--
Then with revengeful eyes he scann'd him o'er:
"Come, and receive thy fate!" He spake no more.

Hector, undaunted, thus: "Such words employ
To one that dreads thee, some unwarlike boy:
Such we could give, defying and defied,
Mean intercourse of obloquy and pride!
I know thy force to mine superior far;
But heaven alone confers success in war:
Mean as I am, the gods may guide my dart,
And give it entrance in a braver heart."

Then parts the lance: but Pallas' heavenly breath
Far from Achilles wafts the winged death:
The bidden dart again to Hector flies,
And at the feet of its great master lies.
Achilles closes with his hated foe,
His heart and eyes with flaming fury glow:
But present to his aid, Apollo shrouds
The favour'd hero in a veil of clouds.
Thrice struck Pelides with indignant heart,
Thrice in impassive air he plunged the dart;
The spear a fourth time buried in the cloud.
He foams with fury, and exclaims aloud:

"Wretch! thou hast 'scaped again; once more thy flight
Has saved thee, and the partial god of light.
But long thou shalt not thy just fate withstand,
If any power assist Achilles' hand.
Fly then inglorious! but thy flight this day
Whole hecatombs of Trojan ghosts shall pay."

With that, he gluts his rage on numbers slain:
Then Dryops tumbled to the ensanguined plain,
Pierced through the neck: he left him panting there,
And stopp'd Demuchus, great Philetor's heir.
Gigantic chief! deep gash'd the enormous blade,
And for the soul an ample passage made.
Laoganus and Dardanus expire,
The valiant sons of an unhappy sire;
Both in one instant from the chariot hurl'd,
Sunk in one instant to the nether world:
This difference only their sad fates afford
That one the spear destroy'd, and one the sword.

Nor less unpitied, young Alastor bleeds;
In vain his youth, in vain his beauty pleads;
In vain he begs thee, with a suppliant's moan,
To spare a form, an age so like thy own!
Unhappy boy! no prayer, no moving art,
E'er bent that fierce, inexorable heart!
While yet he trembled at his knees, and cried,
The ruthless falchion oped his tender side;
The panting liver pours a flood of gore
That drowns his bosom till he pants no more.

Through Mulius' head then drove the impetuous spear:
The warrior falls, transfix'd from ear to ear.
Thy life, Echeclus! next the sword bereaves,
Deep though the front the ponderous falchion cleaves;
Warm'd in the brain the smoking weapon lies,
The purple death comes floating o'er his eyes.
Then brave Deucalion died: the dart was flung
Where the knit nerves the pliant elbow strung;
He dropp'd his arm, an unassisting weight,
And stood all impotent, expecting fate:
Full on his neck the falling falchion sped,
From his broad shoulders hew'd his crested head:
Forth from the bone the spinal marrow flies,
And, sunk in dust, the corpse extended lies.
Rhigmas, whose race from fruitful Thracia came,
(The son of Pierus, an illustrious name,)
Succeeds to fate: the spear his belly rends;
Prone from his car the thundering chief descends.
The squire, who saw expiring on the ground
His prostrate master, rein'd the steeds around;
His back, scarce turn'd, the Pelian javelin gored,
And stretch'd the servant o'er his dying lord.
As when a flame the winding valley fills,
And runs on crackling shrubs between the hills;
Then o'er the stubble up the mountain flies,
Fires the high woods, and blazes to the skies,
This way and that, the spreading torrent roars:
So sweeps the hero through the wasted shores;
Around him wide, immense destruction pours
And earth is deluged with the sanguine showers
As with autumnal harvests cover'd o'er,
And thick bestrewn, lies Ceres' sacred floor;
When round and round, with never-wearied pain,
The trampling steers beat out the unnumber'd grain:
So the fierce coursers, as the chariot rolls,
Tread down whole ranks, and crush out heroes' souls,
Dash'd from their hoofs while o'er the dead they fly,
Black, bloody drops the smoking chariot dye:
The spiky wheels through heaps of carnage tore;
And thick the groaning axles dropp'd with gore.
High o'er the scene of death Achilles stood,
All grim with dust, all horrible in blood:
Yet still insatiate, still with rage on flame;
Such is the lust of never-dying fame!

And now to Xanthus' gliding stream they drove,
Xanthus, immortal progeny of Jove.
The river here divides the flying train,
Part to the town fly diverse o'er the plain,
Where late their troops triumphant bore the fight,
Now chased, and trembling in ignoble flight:
(These with a gathered mist Saturnia shrouds,
And rolls behind the rout a heap of clouds:)
Part plunge into the stream: old Xanthus roars,
The flashing billows beat the whiten'd shores:
With cries promiscuous all the banks resound,
And here, and there, in eddies whirling round,
The flouncing steeds and shrieking warriors drown'd.
As the scorch'd locusts from their fields retire,
While fast behind them runs the blaze of fire;
Driven from the land before the smoky cloud,
The clustering legions rush into the flood:
So, plunged in Xanthus by Achilles' force,
Roars the resounding surge with men and horse.
His bloody lance the hero casts aside,
(Which spreading tamarisks on the margin hide,)
Then, like a god, the rapid billows braves,
Arm'd with his sword, high brandish'd o'er the waves:
Now down he plunges, now he whirls it round,
Deep groan'd the waters with the dying sound;
Repeated wounds the reddening river dyed,
And the warm purple circled on the tide.
Swift through the foamy flood the Trojans fly,
And close in rocks or winding caverns lie:
So the huge dolphin tempesting the main,
In shoals before him fly the scaly train,
Confusedly heap'd they seek their inmost caves,
Or pant and heave beneath the floating waves.
Now, tired with slaughter, from the Trojan band
Twelve chosen youths he drags alive to land;
With their rich belts their captive arms restrains
(Late their proud ornaments, but now their chains).
These his attendants to the ships convey'd,
Sad victims destined to Patroclus' shade;

Then, as once more he plunged amid the flood,
The young Lycaon in his passage stood;
The son of Priam; whom the hero's hand
But late made captive in his father's land
(As from a sycamore, his sounding steel
Lopp'd the green arms to spoke a chariot wheel)
To Lemnos' isle he sold the royal slave,
Where Jason's son the price demanded gave;
But kind Eetion, touching on the shore,
The ransom'd prince to fair Arisbe bore.
Ten days were past, since in his father's reign
He felt the sweets of liberty again;
The next, that god whom men in vain withstand
Gives the same youth to the same conquering hand
Now never to return! and doom'd to go
A sadder journey to the shades below.
His well-known face when great Achilles eyed,
(The helm and visor he had cast aside
With wild affright, and dropp'd upon the field
His useless lance and unavailing shield,)
As trembling, panting, from the stream he fled,
And knock'd his faltering knees, the hero said.
"Ye mighty gods! what wonders strike my view!
Is it in vain our conquering arms subdue?
Sure I shall see yon heaps of Trojans kill'd
Rise from the shades, and brave me on the field;
As now the captive, whom so late I bound
And sold to Lemnos, stalks on Trojan ground!
Not him the sea's unmeasured deeps detain,
That bar such numbers from their native plain;
Lo! he returns. Try, then, my flying spear!
Try, if the grave can hold the wanderer;
If earth, at length this active prince can seize,
Earth, whose strong grasp has held down Hercules."

Thus while he spoke, the Trojan pale with fears
Approach'd, and sought his knees with suppliant tears
Loth as he was to yield his youthful breath,
And his soul shivering at the approach of death.
Achilles raised the spear, prepared to wound;
He kiss'd his feet, extended on the ground:
And while, above, the spear suspended stood,
Longing to dip its thirsty point in blood,
One hand embraced them close, one stopp'd the dart,
While thus these melting words attempt his heart:

"Thy well-known captive, great Achilles! see,
Once more Lycaon trembles at thy knee.
Some pity to a suppliant's name afford,
Who shared the gifts of Ceres at thy board;
Whom late thy conquering arm to Lemnos bore,
Far from his father, friends, and native shore;
A hundred oxen were his price that day,
Now sums immense thy mercy shall repay.
Scarce respited from woes I yet appear,
And scarce twelve morning suns have seen me here;
Lo! Jove again submits me to thy hands,
Again, her victim cruel Fate demands!
I sprang from Priam, and Laothoe fair,
(Old Altes' daughter, and Lelegia's heir;
Who held in Pedasus his famed abode,
And ruled the fields where silver Satnio flow'd,)
Two sons (alas! unhappy sons) she bore;
For ah! one spear shall drink each brother's gore,
And I succeed to slaughter'd Polydore.
How from that arm of terror shall I fly?
Some demon urges! 'tis my doom to die!
If ever yet soft pity touch'd thy mind,
Ah! think not me too much of Hector's kind!
Not the same mother gave thy suppliant breath,
With his, who wrought thy loved Patroclus' death."

These words, attended with a shower of tears,
The youth address'd to unrelenting ears:
"Talk not of life, or ransom (he replies):
Patroclus dead, whoever meets me, dies:
In vain a single Trojan sues for grace;
But least, the sons of Priam's hateful race.
Die then, my friend! what boots it to deplore?
The great, the good Patroclus is no more!
He, far thy better, was foredoom'd to die,
And thou, dost thou bewail mortality?
Seest thou not me, whom nature's gifts adorn,
Sprung from a hero, from a goddess born?
The day shall come (which nothing can avert)
When by the spear, the arrow, or the dart,
By night, or day, by force, or by design,
Impending death and certain fate are mine!
Die then,"--He said; and as the word he spoke,
The fainting stripling sank before the stroke:
His hand forgot its grasp, and left the spear,
While all his trembling frame confess'd his fear:
Sudden, Achilles his broad sword display'd,
And buried in his neck the reeking blade.
Prone fell the youth; and panting on the land,
The gushing purple dyed the thirsty sand.
The victor to the stream the carcase gave,
And thus insults him, floating on the wave:

"Lie there, Lycaon! let the fish surround
Thy bloated corpse, and suck thy gory wound:
There no sad mother shall thy funerals weep,
But swift Scamander roll thee to the deep,
Whose every wave some watery monster brings,
To feast unpunish'd on the fat of kings.
So perish Troy, and all the Trojan line!
Such ruin theirs, and such compassion mine.
What boots ye now Scamander's worshipp'd stream,
His earthly honours, and immortal name?
In vain your immolated bulls are slain,
Your living coursers glut his gulfs in vain!
Thus he rewards you, with this bitter fate;
Thus, till the Grecian vengeance is complete:
Thus is atoned Patroclus' honour'd shade,
And the short absence of Achilles paid."

These boastful words provoked the raging god;
With fury swells the violated flood.
What means divine may yet the power employ
To check Achilles, and to rescue Troy?
Meanwhile the hero springs in arms, to dare
The great Asteropeus to mortal war;
The son of Pelagon, whose lofty line
Flows from the source of Axius, stream divine!
(Fair Peribaea's love the god had crown'd,
With all his refluent waters circled round:)
On him Achilles rush'd; he fearless stood,
And shook two spears, advancing from the flood;
The flood impell'd him, on Pelides' head
To avenge his waters choked with heaps of dead.
Near as they drew, Achilles thus began:

"What art thou, boldest of the race of man?
Who, or from whence? Unhappy is the sire
Whose son encounters our resistless ire."

"O son of Peleus! what avails to trace
(Replied the warrior) our illustrious race?
From rich Paeonia's valleys I command,
Arm'd with protended spears, my native band;
Now shines the tenth bright morning since I came
In aid of Ilion to the fields of fame:
Axius, who swells with all the neighbouring rills,
And wide around the floated region fills,
Begot my sire, whose spear much glory won:
Now lift thy arm, and try that hero's son!"

Threatening he said: the hostile chiefs advance;
At once Asteropeus discharged each lance,
(For both his dexterous hands the lance could wield,)
One struck, but pierced not, the Vulcanian shield;
One razed Achilles' hand; the spouting blood
Spun forth; in earth the fasten'd weapon stood.
Like lightning next the Pelean javelin flies:
Its erring fury hiss'd along the skies;
Deep in the swelling bank was driven the spear,
Even to the middle earth; and quiver'd there.
Then from his side the sword Pelides drew,
And on his foe with double fury flew.
The foe thrice tugg'd, and shook the rooted wood;
Repulsive of his might the weapon stood:
The fourth, he tries to break the spear in vain;
Bent as he stands, he tumbles to the plain;
His belly open'd with a ghastly wound,
The reeking entrails pour upon the ground.
Beneath the hero's feet he panting lies,
And his eye darkens, and his spirit flies;
While the proud victor thus triumphing said,
His radiant armour tearing from the dead:

"So ends thy glory! Such the fate they prove,
Who strive presumptuous with the sons of Jove!
Sprung from a river, didst thou boast thy line?
But great Saturnius is the source of mine.
How durst thou vaunt thy watery progeny?
Of Peleus, acus, and Jove, am I.
The race of these superior far to those,
As he that thunders to the stream that flows.
What rivers can, Scamander might have shown;
But Jove he dreads, nor wars against his son.
Even Achelous might contend in vain,
And all the roaring billows of the main.
The eternal ocean, from whose fountains flow
The seas, the rivers, and the springs below,
The thundering voice of Jove abhors to hear,
And in his deep abysses shakes with fear."

He said: then from the bank his javelin tore,
And left the breathless warrior in his gore.
The floating tides the bloody carcase lave,
And beat against it, wave succeeding wave;
Till, roll'd between the banks, it lies the food
Of curling eels, and fishes of the flood.
All scatter'd round the stream (their mightiest slain)
The amazed Paeonians scour along the plain;
He vents his fury on the flying crew,
Thrasius, Astyplus, and Mnesus slew;
Mydon, Thersilochus, with nius, fell;
And numbers more his lance had plunged to hell,
But from the bottom of his gulfs profound
Scamander spoke; the shores return'd the sound.

"O first of mortals! (for the gods are thine)
In valour matchless, and in force divine!
If Jove have given thee every Trojan head,
'Tis not on me thy rage should heap the dead.
See! my choked streams no more their course can keep,
Nor roll their wonted tribute to the deep.
Turn then, impetuous! from our injured flood;
Content, thy slaughters could amaze a god."

In human form, confess'd before his eyes,
The river thus; and thus the chief replies:
"O sacred stream! thy word we shall obey;
But not till Troy the destined vengeance pay,
Not till within her towers the perjured train
Shall pant, and tremble at our arms again;
Not till proud Hector, guardian of her wall,
Or stain this lance, or see Achilles fall."

He said; and drove with fury on the foe.
Then to the godhead of the silver bow
The yellow flood began: "O son of Jove!
Was not the mandate of the sire above
Full and express, that Phoebus should employ
His sacred arrows in defence of Troy,
And make her conquer, till Hyperion's fall
In awful darkness hide the face of all?"

He spoke in vain--The chief without dismay
Ploughs through the boiling surge his desperate way.
Then rising in his rage above the shores,
From all his deep the bellowing river roars,
Huge heaps of slain disgorges on the coast,
And round the banks the ghastly dead are toss'd.
While all before, the billows ranged on high,
(A watery bulwark,) screen the bands who fly.
Now bursting on his head with thundering sound,
The falling deluge whelms the hero round:
His loaded shield bends to the rushing tide;
His feet, upborne, scarce the strong flood divide,
Sliddering, and staggering. On the border stood
A spreading elm, that overhung the flood;
He seized a bending bough, his steps to stay;
The plant uprooted to his weight gave way.
Heaving the bank, and undermining all;
Loud flash the waters to the rushing fall
Of the thick foliage. The large trunk display'd
Bridged the rough flood across: the hero stay'd
On this his weight, and raised upon his hand,
Leap'd from the channel, and regain'd the land.
Then blacken'd the wild waves: the murmur rose:
The god pursues, a huger billow throws,
And bursts the bank, ambitious to destroy
The man whose fury is the fate of Troy.
He like the warlike eagle speeds his pace
(Swiftest and strongest of the aerial race);
Far as a spear can fly, Achilles springs;
At every bound his clanging armour rings:
Now here, now there, he turns on every side,
And winds his course before the following tide;
The waves flow after, wheresoe'er he wheels,
And gather fast, and murmur at his heels.
So when a peasant to his garden brings
Soft rills of water from the bubbling springs,
And calls the floods from high, to bless his bowers,
And feed with pregnant streams the plants and flowers:
Soon as he clears whate'er their passage stay'd,
And marks the future current with his spade,
Swift o'er the rolling pebbles, down the hills,
Louder and louder purl the falling rills;
Before him scattering, they prevent his pains,
And shine in mazy wanderings o'er the plains.

Still flies Achilles, but before his eyes
Still swift Scamander rolls where'er he flies:
Not all his speed escapes the rapid floods;
The first of men, but not a match for gods.
Oft as he turn'd the torrent to oppose,
And bravely try if all the powers were foes;
So oft the surge, in watery mountains spread,
Beats on his back, or bursts upon his head.
Yet dauntless still the adverse flood he braves,
And still indignant bounds above the waves.
Tired by the tides, his knees relax with toil;
Wash'd from beneath him slides the slimy soil;
When thus (his eyes on heaven's expansion thrown)
Forth bursts the hero with an angry groan:

"Is there no god Achilles to befriend,
No power to avert his miserable end?
Prevent, O Jove! this ignominious date,
And make my future life the sport of fate.
Of all heaven's oracles believed in vain,
But most of Thetis must her son complain;
By Phoebus' darts she prophesied my fall,
In glorious arms before the Trojan wall.
Oh! had I died in fields of battle warm,
Stretch'd like a hero, by a hero's arm!
Might Hector's spear this dauntless bosom rend,
And my swift soul o'ertake my slaughter'd friend.
Ah no! Achilles meets a shameful fate,
Oh how unworthy of the brave and great!
Like some vile swain, whom on a rainy day,
Crossing a ford, the torrent sweeps away,
An unregarded carcase to the sea."

Neptune and Pallas haste to his relief,
And thus in human form address'd the chief:
The power of ocean first: "Forbear thy fear,
O son of Peleus! Lo, thy gods appear!
Behold! from Jove descending to thy aid,
Propitious Neptune, and the blue-eyed maid.
Stay, and the furious flood shall cease to rave
'Tis not thy fate to glut his angry wave.
But thou, the counsel heaven suggests, attend!
Nor breathe from combat, nor thy sword suspend,
Till Troy receive her flying sons, till all
Her routed squadrons pant behind their wall:
Hector alone shall stand his fatal chance,
And Hector's blood shall smoke upon thy lance.
Thine is the glory doom'd." Thus spake the gods:
Then swift ascended to the bright abodes.

Stung with new ardour, thus by heaven impell'd,
He springs impetuous, and invades the field:
O'er all the expanded plain the waters spread;
Heaved on the bounding billows danced the dead,
Floating 'midst scatter'd arms; while casques of gold
And turn'd-up bucklers glitter'd as they roll'd.
High o'er the surging tide, by leaps and bounds,
He wades, and mounts; the parted wave resounds.
Not a whole river stops the hero's course,
While Pallas fills him with immortal force.
With equal rage, indignant Xanthus roars,
And lifts his billows, and o'erwhelms his shores.

Then thus to Simois! "Haste, my brother flood;
And check this mortal that controls a god;
Our bravest heroes else shall quit the fight,
And Ilion tumble from her towery height.
Call then thy subject streams, and bid them roar,
From all thy fountains swell thy watery store,
With broken rocks, and with a load of dead,
Charge the black surge, and pour it on his head.
Mark how resistless through the floods he goes,
And boldly bids the warring gods be foes!
But nor that force, nor form divine to sight,
Shall aught avail him, if our rage unite:
Whelm'd under our dark gulfs those arms shall lie,
That blaze so dreadful in each Trojan eye;
And deep beneath a sandy mountain hurl'd,
Immersed remain this terror of the world.
Such ponderous ruin shall confound the place,
No Greeks shall e'er his perish'd relics grace,
No hand his bones shall gather, or inhume;
These his cold rites, and this his watery tomb."

He said; and on the chief descends amain,
Increased with gore, and swelling with the slain.
Then, murmuring from his beds, he boils, he raves,
And a foam whitens on the purple waves:
At every step, before Achilles stood
The crimson surge, and deluged him with blood.
Fear touch'd the queen of heaven: she saw dismay'd,
She call'd aloud, and summon'd Vulcan's aid.

"Rise to the war! the insulting flood requires
Thy wasteful arm! assemble all thy fires!
While to their aid, by our command enjoin'd,
Rush the swift eastern and the western wind:
These from old ocean at my word shall blow,
Pour the red torrent on the watery foe,
Corses and arms to one bright ruin turn,
And hissing rivers to their bottoms burn.
Go, mighty in thy rage! display thy power,
Drink the whole flood, the crackling trees devour.
Scorch all the banks! and (till our voice reclaim)
Exert the unwearied furies of the flame!"

The power ignipotent her word obeys:
Wide o'er the plain he pours the boundless blaze;
At once consumes the dead, and dries the soil
And the shrunk waters in their channel boil.
As when autumnal Boreas sweeps the sky,
And instant blows the water'd gardens dry:
So look'd the field, so whiten'd was the ground,
While Vulcan breathed the fiery blast around.
Swift on the sedgy reeds the ruin preys;
Along the margin winds the running blaze:
The trees in flaming rows to ashes turn,
The flowering lotos and the tamarisk burn,
Broad elm, and cypress rising in a spire;
The watery willows hiss before the fire.
Now glow the waves, the fishes pant for breath,
The eels lie twisting in the pangs of death:
Now flounce aloft, now dive the scaly fry,
Or, gasping, turn their bellies to the sky.
At length the river rear'd his languid head,
And thus, short-panting, to the god he said:

"Oh Vulcan! oh! what power resists thy might?
I faint, I sink, unequal to the fight--
I yield--Let Ilion fall; if fate decree--
Ah--bend no more thy fiery arms on me!"

He ceased; wide conflagration blazing round;
The bubbling waters yield a hissing sound.
As when the flames beneath a cauldron rise,
To melt the fat of some rich sacrifice,
Amid the fierce embrace of circling fires
The waters foam, the heavy smoke aspires:
So boils the imprison'd flood, forbid to flow,
And choked with vapours feels his bottom glow.
To Juno then, imperial queen of air,
The burning river sends his earnest prayer:

"Ah why, Saturnia; must thy son engage
Me, only me, with all his wasteful rage?
On other gods his dreadful arm employ,
For mightier gods assert the cause of Troy.
Submissive I desist, if thou command;
But ah! withdraw this all-destroying hand.
Hear then my solemn oath, to yield to fate
Unaided Ilion, and her destined state,
Till Greece shall gird her with destructive flame,
And in one ruin sink the Trojan name."

His warm entreaty touch'd Saturnia's ear:
She bade the ignipotent his rage forbear,
Recall the flame, nor in a mortal cause
Infest a god: the obedient flame withdraws:
Again the branching streams begin to spread,
And soft remurmur in their wonted bed.

While these by Juno's will the strife resign,
The warring gods in fierce contention join:
Rekindling rage each heavenly breast alarms:
With horrid clangour shock the ethereal arms:
Heaven in loud thunder bids the trumpet sound;
And wide beneath them groans the rending ground.
Jove, as his sport, the dreadful scene descries,
And views contending gods with careless eyes.
The power of battles lifts his brazen spear,
And first assaults the radiant queen of war:

"What moved thy madness, thus to disunite
Ethereal minds, and mix all heaven in fight?
What wonder this, when in thy frantic mood
Thou drovest a mortal to insult a god?
Thy impious hand Tydides' javelin bore,
And madly bathed it in celestial gore."

He spoke, and smote the long-resounding shield,
Which bears Jove's thunder on its dreadful field:
The adamantine aegis of her sire,
That turns the glancing bolt and forked fire.

Then heaved the goddess in her mighty hand
A stone, the limit of the neighbouring land,
There fix'd from eldest times; black, craggy, vast;
This at the heavenly homicide she cast.
Thundering he falls, a mass of monstrous size:
And seven broad acres covers as he lies.
The stunning stroke his stubborn nerves unbound:
Loud o'er the fields his ringing arms resound:
The scornful dame her conquest views with smiles,
And, glorying, thus the prostrate god reviles:

"Hast thou not yet, insatiate fury! known
How far Minerva's force transcends thy own?
Juno, whom thou rebellious darest withstand,
Corrects thy folly thus by Pallas' hand;
Thus meets thy broken faith with just disgrace,
And partial aid to Troy's perfidious race."

The goddess spoke, and turn'd her eyes away,
That, beaming round, diffused celestial day.
Jove's Cyprian daughter, stooping on the land,
Lent to the wounded god her tender hand:
Slowly he rises, scarcely breathes with pain,
And, propp'd on her fair arm, forsakes the plain.
This the bright empress of the heavens survey'd,
And, scoffing, thus to war's victorious maid:

"Lo! what an aid on Mars's side is seen!
The smiles' and loves' unconquerable queen!
Mark with what insolence, in open view,
She moves: let Pallas, if she dares, pursue."

Minerva smiling heard, the pair o'ertook,
And slightly on her breast the wanton strook:
She, unresisting, fell (her spirits fled);
On earth together lay the lovers spread.
"And like these heroes be the fate of all
(Minerva cries) who guard the Trojan wall!
To Grecian gods such let the Phrygian be,
So dread, so fierce, as Venus is to me;
Then from the lowest stone shall Troy be moved."
Thus she, and Juno with a smile approved.

Meantime, to mix in more than mortal fight,
The god of ocean dares the god of light.
"What sloth has seized us, when the fields around
Ring with conflicting powers, and heaven returns the sound:
Shall, ignominious, we with shame retire,
No deed perform'd, to our Olympian sire?
Come, prove thy arm! for first the war to wage,
Suits not my greatness, or superior age:
Rash as thou art to prop the Trojan throne,
(Forgetful of my wrongs, and of thy own,)
And guard the race of proud Laomedon!
Hast thou forgot, how, at the monarch's prayer,
We shared the lengthen'd labours of a year?
Troy walls I raised (for such were Jove's commands),
And yon proud bulwarks grew beneath my hands:
Thy task it was to feed the bellowing droves
Along fair Ida's vales and pendant groves.
But when the circling seasons in their train
Brought back the grateful day that crown'd our pain,
With menace stern the fraudful king defied
Our latent godhead, and the prize denied:
Mad as he was, he threaten'd servile bands,
And doom'd us exiles far in barbarous lands.
Incensed, we heavenward fled with swiftest wing,
And destined vengeance on the perjured king.
Dost thou, for this, afford proud Ilion grace,
And not, like us, infest the faithless race;
Like us, their present, future sons destroy,
And from its deep foundations heave their Troy?"

Apollo thus: "To combat for mankind
Ill suits the wisdom of celestial mind;
For what is man? Calamitous by birth,
They owe their life and nourishment to earth;
Like yearly leaves, that now, with beauty crown'd,
Smile on the sun; now, wither on the ground.
To their own hands commit the frantic scene,
Nor mix immortals in a cause so mean."

Then turns his face, far-beaming heavenly fires,
And from the senior power submiss retires:
Him thus retreating, Artemis upbraids,
The quiver'd huntress of the sylvan shades:

"And is it thus the youthful Phoebus flies,
And yields to ocean's hoary sire the prize?
How vain that martial pomp, and dreadful show
Of pointed arrows and the silver bow!
Now boast no more in yon celestial bower,
Thy force can match the great earth-shaking power."

Silent he heard the queen of woods upbraid:
Not so Saturnia bore the vaunting maid:
But furious thus: "What insolence has driven
Thy pride to face the majesty of heaven?
What though by Jove the female plague design'd,
Fierce to the feeble race of womankind,
The wretched matron feels thy piercing dart;
Thy sex's tyrant, with a tiger's heart?
What though tremendous in the woodland chase
Thy certain arrows pierce the savage race?
How dares thy rashness on the powers divine
Employ those arms, or match thy force with mine?
Learn hence, no more unequal war to wage--"
She said, and seized her wrists with eager rage;
These in her left hand lock'd, her right untied
The bow, the quiver, and its plumy pride.
About her temples flies the busy bow;
Now here, now there, she winds her from the blow;
The scattering arrows, rattling from the case,
Drop round, and idly mark the dusty place.
Swift from the field the baffled huntress flies,
And scarce restrains the torrent in her eyes:
So, when the falcon wings her way above,
To the cleft cavern speeds the gentle dove;
(Not fated yet to die;) there safe retreats,
Yet still her heart against the marble beats.

To her Latona hastes with tender care;
Whom Hermes viewing, thus declines the war:
"How shall I face the dame, who gives delight
To him whose thunders blacken heaven with night?
Go, matchless goddess! triumph in the skies,
And boast my conquest, while I yield the prize."

He spoke; and pass'd: Latona, stooping low,
Collects the scatter'd shafts and fallen bow,
That, glittering on the dust, lay here and there
Dishonour'd relics of Diana's war:
Then swift pursued her to her blest abode,
Where, all confused, she sought the sovereign god;
Weeping, she grasp'd his knees: the ambrosial vest
Shook with her sighs, and panted on her breast.

The sire superior smiled, and bade her show
What heavenly hand had caused his daughter's woe?
Abash'd, she names his own imperial spouse;
And the pale crescent fades upon her brows.

Thus they above: while, swiftly gliding down,
Apollo enters Ilion's sacred town;
The guardian-god now trembled for her wall,
And fear'd the Greeks, though fate forbade her fall.
Back to Olympus, from the war's alarms,
Return the shining bands of gods in arms;
Some proud in triumph, some with rage on fire;
And take their thrones around the ethereal sire.

Through blood, through death, Achilles still proceeds,
O'er slaughter'd heroes, and o'er rolling steeds.
As when avenging flames with fury driven
On guilty towns exert the wrath of heaven;
The pale inhabitants, some fall, some fly;
And the red vapours purple all the sky:
So raged Achilles: death and dire dismay,
And toils, and terrors, fill'd the dreadful day.

High on a turret hoary Priam stands,
And marks the waste of his destructive hands;
Views, from his arm, the Trojans' scatter'd flight,
And the near hero rising on his sight!
No stop, no check, no aid! With feeble pace,
And settled sorrow on his aged face,
Fast as he could, he sighing quits the walls;
And thus descending, on the guards he calls:

"You to whose care our city-gates belong,
Set wide your portals to the flying throng:
For lo! he comes, with unresisted sway;
He comes, and desolation marks his way!
But when within the walls our troops take breath,
Lock fast the brazen bars, and shut out death."
Thus charged the reverend monarch: wide were flung
The opening folds; the sounding hinges rung.
Phoebus rush'd forth, the flying bands to meet;
Struck slaughter back, and cover'd the retreat,
On heaps the Trojans crowd to gain the gate,
And gladsome see their last escape from fate.
Thither, all parch'd with thirst, a heartless train,
Hoary with dust, they beat the hollow plain:
And gasping, panting, fainting, labour on
With heavier strides, that lengthen toward the town.
Enraged Achilles follows with his spear;
Wild with revenge, insatiable of war.

Then had the Greeks eternal praise acquired,
And Troy inglorious to her walls retired;
But he, the god who darts ethereal flame,
Shot down to save her, and redeem her fame:
To young Agenor force divine he gave;
(Antenor's offspring, haughty, bold, and brave;)
In aid of him, beside the beech he sate,
And wrapt in clouds, restrain'd the hand of fate.
When now the generous youth Achilles spies.
Thick beats his heart, the troubled motions rise.
(So, ere a storm, the waters heave and roll.)
He stops, and questions thus his mighty soul;

"What, shall I fly this terror of the plain!
Like others fly, and be like others slain?
Vain hope! to shun him by the self-same road
Yon line of slaughter'd Trojans lately trod.
No: with the common heap I scorn to fall--
What if they pass'd me to the Trojan wall,
While I decline to yonder path, that leads
To Ida's forests and surrounding shades?
So may I reach, conceal'd, the cooling flood,
From my tired body wash the dirt and blood,
As soon as night her dusky veil extends,
Return in safety to my Trojan friends.
What if?--But wherefore all this vain debate?
Stand I to doubt, within the reach of fate?
Even now perhaps, ere yet I turn the wall,
The fierce Achilles sees me, and I fall:
Such is his swiftness, 'tis in vain to fly,
And such his valour, that who stands must die.
Howe'er 'tis better, fighting for the state,
Here, and in public view, to meet my fate.
Yet sure he too is mortal; he may feel
(Like all the sons of earth) the force of steel.
One only soul informs that dreadful frame:
And Jove's sole favour gives him all his fame."

He said, and stood, collected, in his might;
And all his beating bosom claim'd the fight.
So from some deep-grown wood a panther starts,
Roused from his thicket by a storm of darts:
Untaught to fear or fly, he hears the sounds
Of shouting hunters, and of clamorous hounds;
Though struck, though wounded, scarce perceives the pain;
And the barb'd javelin stings his breast in vain:
On their whole war, untamed, the savage flies;
And tears his hunter, or beneath him dies.
Not less resolved, Antenor's valiant heir
Confronts Achilles, and awaits the war,
Disdainful of retreat: high held before,
His shield (a broad circumference) he bore;
Then graceful as he stood, in act to throw
The lifted javelin, thus bespoke the foe:

"How proud Achilles glories in his fame!
And hopes this day to sink the Trojan name
Beneath her ruins! Know, that hope is vain;
A thousand woes, a thousand toils remain.
Parents and children our just arms employ,
And strong and many are the sons of Troy.
Great as thou art, even thou may'st stain with gore
These Phrygian fields, and press a foreign shore."

He said: with matchless force the javelin flung
Smote on his knee; the hollow cuishes rung
Beneath the pointed steel; but safe from harms
He stands impassive in the ethereal arms.
Then fiercely rushing on the daring foe,
His lifted arm prepares the fatal blow:
But, jealous of his fame, Apollo shrouds
The god-like Trojan in a veil of clouds.
Safe from pursuit, and shut from mortal view,
Dismiss'd with fame, the favoured youth withdrew.
Meanwhile the god, to cover their escape,
Assumes Agenor's habit, voice and shape,
Flies from the furious chief in this disguise;
The furious chief still follows where he flies.
Now o'er the fields they stretch with lengthen'd strides,
Now urge the course where swift Scamander glides:
The god, now distant scarce a stride before,
Tempts his pursuit, and wheels about the shore;
While all the flying troops their speed employ,
And pour on heaps into the walls of Troy:
No stop, no stay; no thought to ask, or tell,
Who 'scaped by flight, or who by battle fell.
'Twas tumult all, and violence of flight;
And sudden joy confused, and mix'd affright.
Pale Troy against Achilles shuts her gate:
And nations breathe, deliver'd from their fate.

Thus to their bulwarks, smit with panic fear,
The herded Ilians rush like driven deer:
There safe they wipe the briny drops away,
And drown in bowls the labours of the day.
Close to the walls, advancing o'er the fields
Beneath one roof of well-compacted shields,
March, bending on, the Greeks' embodied powers,
Far stretching in the shade of Trojan towers.
Great Hector singly stay'd: chain'd down by fate
There fix'd he stood before the Scaean gate;
Still his bold arms determined to employ,
The guardian still of long-defended Troy.

Apollo now to tired Achilles turns:
(The power confess'd in all his glory burns:)
"And what (he cries) has Peleus' son in view,
With mortal speed a godhead to pursue?
For not to thee to know the gods is given,
Unskill'd to trace the latent marks of heaven.
What boots thee now, that Troy forsook the plain?
Vain thy past labour, and thy present vain:
Safe in their walls are now her troops bestow'd,
While here thy frantic rage attacks a god."

The chief incensed--"Too partial god of day!
To check my conquests in the middle way:
How few in Ilion else had refuge found!
What gasping numbers now had bit the ground!
Thou robb'st me of a glory justly mine,
Powerful of godhead, and of fraud divine:
Mean fame, alas! for one of heavenly strain,
To cheat a mortal who repines in vain."

Then to the city, terrible and strong,
With high and haughty steps he tower'd along,
So the proud courser, victor of the prize,
To the near goal with double ardour flies.
Him, as he blazing shot across the field,
The careful eyes of Priam first beheld.
Not half so dreadful rises to the sight,
Through the thick gloom of some tempestuous night,
Orion's dog (the year when autumn weighs),
And o'er the feebler stars exerts his rays;
Terrific glory! for his burning breath
Taints the red air with fevers, plagues, and death.
So flamed his fiery mail. Then wept the sage:
He strikes his reverend head, now white with age;
He lifts his wither'd arms; obtests the skies;
He calls his much-loved son with feeble cries:
The son, resolved Achilles' force to dare,
Full at the Scaean gates expects the war;
While the sad father on the rampart stands,
And thus adjures him with extended hands:

"Ah stay not, stay not! guardless and alone;
Hector! my loved, my dearest, bravest son!
Methinks already I behold thee slain,
And stretch'd beneath that fury of the plain.
Implacable Achilles! might'st thou be
To all the gods no dearer than to me!
Thee, vultures wild should scatter round the shore.
And bloody dogs grow fiercer from thy gore.
How many valiant sons I late enjoy'd,
Valiant in vain! by thy cursed arm destroy'd:
Or, worse than slaughtered, sold in distant isles
To shameful bondage, and unworthy toils.
Two, while I speak, my eyes in vain explore,
Two from one mother sprung, my Polydore,
And loved Lycaon; now perhaps no more!
Oh! if in yonder hostile camp they live,
What heaps of gold, what treasures would I give!
(Their grandsire's wealth, by right of birth their own,
Consign'd his daughter with Lelegia's throne:)
But if (which Heaven forbid) already lost,
All pale they wander on the Stygian coast;
What sorrows then must their sad mother know,
What anguish I? unutterable woe!
Yet less that anguish, less to her, to me,
Less to all Troy, if not deprived of thee.
Yet shun Achilles! enter yet the wall;
And spare thyself, thy father, spare us all!
Save thy dear life; or, if a soul so brave
Neglect that thought, thy dearer glory save.
Pity, while yet I live, these silver hairs;
While yet thy father feels the woes he bears,
Yet cursed with sense! a wretch, whom in his rage
(All trembling on the verge of helpless age)
Great Jove has placed, sad spectacle of pain!
The bitter dregs of fortune's cup to drain:
To fill with scenes of death his closing eyes,
And number all his days by miseries!
My heroes slain, my bridal bed o'erturn'd,
My daughters ravish'd, and my city burn'd,
My bleeding infants dash'd against the floor;
These I have yet to see, perhaps yet more!
Perhaps even I, reserved by angry fate,
The last sad relic of my ruin'd state,
(Dire pomp of sovereign wretchedness!) must fall,
And stain the pavement of my regal hall;
Where famish'd dogs, late guardians of my door,
Shall lick their mangled master's spatter'd gore.
Yet for my sons I thank ye, gods! 'tis well;
Well have they perish'd, for in fight they fell.
Who dies in youth and vigour, dies the best,
Struck through with wounds, all honest on the breast.
But when the fates, in fulness of their rage,
Spurn the hoar head of unresisting age,
In dust the reverend lineaments deform,
And pour to dogs the life-blood scarcely warm:
This, this is misery! the last, the worse,
That man can feel! man, fated to be cursed!"

He said, and acting what no words could say,
Rent from his head the silver locks away.
With him the mournful mother bears a part;
Yet all her sorrows turn not Hector's heart.
The zone unbraced, her bosom she display'd;
And thus, fast-falling the salt tears, she said:

"Have mercy on me, O my son! revere
The words of age; attend a parent's prayer!
If ever thee in these fond arms I press'd,
Or still'd thy infant clamours at this breast;
Ah do not thus our helpless years forego,
But, by our walls secured, repel the foe.
Against his rage if singly thou proceed,
Should'st thou, (but Heaven avert it!) should'st thou bleed,
Nor must thy corse lie honour'd on the bier,
Nor spouse, nor mother, grace thee with a tear!
Far from our pious rites those dear remains
Must feast the vultures on the naked plains."

So they, while down their cheeks the torrents roll;
But fix'd remains the purpose of his soul;
Resolved he stands, and with a fiery glance
Expects the hero's terrible advance.
So, roll'd up in his den, the swelling snake
Beholds the traveller approach the brake;
When fed with noxious herbs his turgid veins
Have gather'd half the poisons of the plains;
He burns, he stiffens with collected ire,
And his red eyeballs glare with living fire.
Beneath a turret, on his shield reclined,
He stood, and question'd thus his mighty mind:

"Where lies my way? to enter in the wall?
Honour and shame the ungenerous thought recall:
Shall proud Polydamas before the gate
Proclaim, his counsels are obey'd too late,
Which timely follow'd but the former night,
What numbers had been saved by Hector's flight?
That wise advice rejected with disdain,
I feel my folly in my people slain.
Methinks my suffering country's voice I hear,
But most her worthless sons insult my ear,
On my rash courage charge the chance of war,
And blame those virtues which they cannot share.
No--if I e'er return, return I must
Glorious, my country's terror laid in dust:
Or if I perish, let her see me fall
In field at least, and fighting for her wall.
And yet suppose these measures I forego,
Approach unarm'd, and parley with the foe,
The warrior-shield, the helm, and lance, lay down.
And treat on terms of peace to save the town:
The wife withheld, the treasure ill-detain'd
(Cause of the war, and grievance of the land)
With honourable justice to restore:
And add half Ilion's yet remaining store,
Which Troy shall, sworn, produce; that injured Greece
May share our wealth, and leave our walls in peace.
But why this thought? Unarm'd if I should go,
What hope of mercy from this vengeful foe,
But woman-like to fall, and fall without a blow?
We greet not here, as man conversing man,
Met at an oak, or journeying o'er a plain;
No season now for calm familiar talk,
Like youths and maidens in an evening walk:
War is our business, but to whom is given
To die, or triumph, that, determine Heaven!"

Thus pondering, like a god the Greek drew nigh;
His dreadful plumage nodded from on high;
The Pelian javelin, in his better hand,
Shot trembling rays that glitter'd o'er the land;
And on his breast the beamy splendour shone,
Like Jove's own lightning, or the rising sun.
As Hector sees, unusual terrors rise,
Struck by some god, he fears, recedes, and flies.
He leaves the gates, he leaves the wall behind:
Achilles follows like the winged wind.
Thus at the panting dove a falcon flies
(The swiftest racer of the liquid skies),
Just when he holds, or thinks he holds his prey,
Obliquely wheeling through the aerial way,
With open beak and shrilling cries he springs,
And aims his claws, and shoots upon his wings:
No less fore-right the rapid chase they held,
One urged by fury, one by fear impell'd:
Now circling round the walls their course maintain,
Where the high watch-tower overlooks the plain;
Now where the fig-trees spread their umbrage broad,
(A wider compass,) smoke along the road.
Next by Scamander's double source they bound,
Where two famed fountains burst the parted ground;
This hot through scorching clefts is seen to rise,
With exhalations steaming to the skies;
That the green banks in summer's heat o'erflows,
Like crystal clear, and cold as winter snows:
Each gushing fount a marble cistern fills,
Whose polish'd bed receives the falling rills;
Where Trojan dames (ere yet alarm'd by Greece)
Wash'd their fair garments in the days of peace.
By these they pass'd, one chasing, one in flight:
(The mighty fled, pursued by stronger might:)
Swift was the course; no vulgar prize they play,
No vulgar victim must reward the day:
(Such as in races crown the speedy strife:)
The prize contended was great Hector's life.
As when some hero's funerals are decreed
In grateful honour of the mighty dead;
Where high rewards the vigorous youth inflame
(Some golden tripod, or some lovely dame)
The panting coursers swiftly turn the goal,
And with them turns the raised spectator's soul:
Thus three times round the Trojan wall they fly.
The gazing gods lean forward from the sky;
To whom, while eager on the chase they look,
The sire of mortals and immortals spoke:

"Unworthy sight! the man beloved of heaven,
Behold, inglorious round yon city driven!
My heart partakes the generous Hector's pain;
Hector, whose zeal whole hecatombs has slain,
Whose grateful fumes the gods received with joy,
From Ida's summits, and the towers of Troy:
Now see him flying; to his fears resign'd,
And fate, and fierce Achilles, close behind.
Consult, ye powers! ('tis worthy your debate)
Whether to snatch him from impending fate,
Or let him bear, by stern Pelides slain,
(Good as he is) the lot imposed on man."

Then Pallas thus: "Shall he whose vengeance forms
The forky bolt, and blackens heaven with storms,
Shall he prolong one Trojan's forfeit breath?
A man, a mortal, pre-ordain'd to death!
And will no murmurs fill the courts above?
No gods indignant blame their partial Jove?"

"Go then (return'd the sire) without delay,
Exert thy will: I give the Fates their way.
Swift at the mandate pleased Tritonia flies,
And stoops impetuous from the cleaving skies.

As through the forest, o'er the vale and lawn,
The well-breath'd beagle drives the flying fawn,
In vain he tries the covert of the brakes,
Or deep beneath the trembling thicket shakes;
Sure of the vapour in the tainted dews,
The certain hound his various maze pursues.
Thus step by step, where'er the Trojan wheel'd,
There swift Achilles compass'd round the field.
Oft as to reach the Dardan gates he bends,
And hopes the assistance of his pitying friends,
(Whose showering arrows, as he coursed below,
From the high turrets might oppress the foe,)
So oft Achilles turns him to the plain:
He eyes the city, but he eyes in vain.
As men in slumbers seem with speedy pace,
One to pursue, and one to lead the chase,
Their sinking limbs the fancied course forsake,
Nor this can fly, nor that can overtake:
No less the labouring heroes pant and strain:
While that but flies, and this pursues in vain.

What god, O muse, assisted Hector's force
With fate itself so long to hold the course?
Phoebus it was; who, in his latest hour,
Endued his knees with strength, his nerves with power:
And great Achilles, lest some Greek's advance
Should snatch the glory from his lifted lance,
Sign'd to the troops to yield his foe the way,
And leave untouch'd the honours of the day.

Jove lifts the golden balances, that show
The fates of mortal men, and things below:
Here each contending hero's lot he tries,
And weighs, with equal hand, their destinies.
Low sinks the scale surcharged with Hector's fate;
Heavy with death it sinks, and hell receives the weight.

Then Phoebus left him. Fierce Minerva flies
To stern Pelides, and triumphing, cries:
"O loved of Jove! this day our labours cease,
And conquest blazes with full beams on Greece.
Great Hector falls; that Hector famed so far,
Drunk with renown, insatiable of war,
Falls by thy hand, and mine! nor force, nor flight,
Shall more avail him, nor his god of light.
See, where in vain he supplicates above,
Roll'd at the feet of unrelenting Jove;
Rest here: myself will lead the Trojan on,
And urge to meet the fate he cannot shun."

Her voice divine the chief with joyful mind
Obey'd; and rested, on his lance reclined
While like Deiphobus the martial dame
(Her face, her gesture, and her arms the same),
In show an aid, by hapless Hector's side
Approach'd, and greets him thus with voice belied:

"Too long, O Hector! have I borne the sight
Of this distress, and sorrow'd in thy flight:
It fits us now a noble stand to make,
And here, as brothers, equal fates partake."

Then he: "O prince! allied in blood and fame,
Dearer than all that own a brother's name;
Of all that Hecuba to Priam bore,
Long tried, long loved: much loved, but honoured more!
Since you, of all our numerous race alone
Defend my life, regardless of your own."

Again the goddess: "Much my father's prayer,
And much my mother's, press'd me to forbear:
My friends embraced my knees, adjured my stay,
But stronger love impell'd, and I obey.
Come then, the glorious conflict let us try,
Let the steel sparkle, and the javelin fly;
Or let us stretch Achilles on the field,
Or to his arm our bloody trophies yield."

Fraudful she said; then swiftly march'd before:
The Dardan hero shuns his foe no more.
Sternly they met. The silence Hector broke:
His dreadful plumage nodded as he spoke:

"Enough, O son of Peleus! Troy has view'd
Her walls thrice circled, and her chief pursued.
But now some god within me bids me try
Thine, or my fate: I kill thee, or I die.
Yet on the verge of battle let us stay,
And for a moment's space suspend the day;
Let Heaven's high powers be call'd to arbitrate
The just conditions of this stern debate,
(Eternal witnesses of all below,
And faithful guardians of the treasured vow!)
To them I swear; if, victor in the strife,
Jove by these hands shall shed thy noble life,
No vile dishonour shall thy corse pursue;
Stripp'd of its arms alone (the conqueror's due)
The rest to Greece uninjured I'll restore:
Now plight thy mutual oath, I ask no more."

"Talk not of oaths (the dreadful chief replies,
While anger flash'd from his disdainful eyes),
Detested as thou art, and ought to be,
Nor oath nor pact Achilles plights with thee:
Such pacts as lambs and rabid wolves combine,
Such leagues as men and furious lions join,
To such I call the gods! one constant state
Of lasting rancour and eternal hate:
No thought but rage, and never-ceasing strife,
Till death extinguish rage, and thought, and life.
Rouse then thy forces this important hour,
Collect thy soul, and call forth all thy power.
No further subterfuge, no further chance;
'Tis Pallas, Pallas gives thee to my lance.
Each Grecian ghost, by thee deprived of breath,
Now hovers round, and calls thee to thy death."

He spoke, and launch'd his javelin at the foe;
But Hector shunn'd the meditated blow:
He stoop'd, while o'er his head the flying spear
Sang innocent, and spent its force in air.
Minerva watch'd it falling on the land,
Then drew, and gave to great Achilles' hand,
Unseen of Hector, who, elate with joy,
Now shakes his lance, and braves the dread of Troy.

"The life you boasted to that javelin given,
Prince! you have miss'd. My fate depends on Heaven,
To thee, presumptuous as thou art, unknown,
Or what must prove my fortune, or thy own.
Boasting is but an art, our fears to blind,
And with false terrors sink another's mind.
But know, whatever fate I am to try,
By no dishonest wound shall Hector die.
I shall not fall a fugitive at least,
My soul shall bravely issue from my breast.
But first, try thou my arm; and may this dart
End all my country's woes, deep buried in thy heart."

The weapon flew, its course unerring held,
Unerring, but the heavenly shield repell'd
The mortal dart; resulting with a bound
From off the ringing orb, it struck the ground.
Hector beheld his javelin fall in vain,
Nor other lance, nor other hope remain;
He calls Deiphobus, demands a spear--
In vain, for no Deiphobus was there.
All comfortless he stands: then, with a sigh;
"'Tis so--Heaven wills it, and my hour is nigh!
I deem'd Deiphobus had heard my call,
But he secure lies guarded in the wall.
A god deceived me; Pallas, 'twas thy deed,
Death and black fate approach! 'tis I must bleed.
No refuge now, no succour from above,
Great Jove deserts me, and the son of Jove,
Propitious once, and kind! Then welcome fate!
'Tis true I perish, yet I perish great:
Yet in a mighty deed I shall expire,
Let future ages hear it, and admire!"

Fierce, at the word, his weighty sword he drew,
And, all collected, on Achilles flew.
So Jove's bold bird, high balanced in the air,
Stoops from the clouds to truss the quivering hare.
Nor less Achilles his fierce soul prepares:
Before his breast the flaming shield he bears,
Refulgent orb! above his fourfold cone
The gilded horse-hair sparkled in the sun.
Nodding at every step: (Vulcanian frame!)
And as he moved, his figure seem'd on flame.
As radiant Hesper shines with keener light,
Far-beaming o'er the silver host of night,
When all the starry train emblaze the sphere:
So shone the point of great Achilles' spear.
In his right hand he waves the weapon round,
Eyes the whole man, and meditates the wound;
But the rich mail Patroclus lately wore
Securely cased the warrior's body o'er.
One space at length he spies, to let in fate,
Where 'twixt the neck and throat the jointed plate
Gave entrance: through that penetrable part
Furious he drove the well-directed dart:
Nor pierced the windpipe yet, nor took the power
Of speech, unhappy! from thy dying hour.
Prone on the field the bleeding warrior lies,
While, thus triumphing, stern Achilles cries:

"At last is Hector stretch'd upon the plain,
Who fear'd no vengeance for Patroclus slain:
Then, prince! you should have fear'd, what now you feel;
Achilles absent was Achilles still:
Yet a short space the great avenger stayed,
Then low in dust thy strength and glory laid.
Peaceful he sleeps, with all our rites adorn'd,
For ever honour'd, and for ever mourn'd:
While cast to all the rage of hostile power,
Thee birds shall mangle, and the gods devour."

Then Hector, fainting at the approach of death:
"By thy own soul! by those who gave thee breath!
By all the sacred prevalence of prayer;
Ah, leave me not for Grecian dogs to tear!
The common rites of sepulture bestow,
To soothe a father's and a mother's woe:
Let their large gifts procure an urn at least,
And Hector's ashes in his country rest."

"No, wretch accursed! relentless he replies;
(Flames, as he spoke, shot flashing from his eyes;)
Not those who gave me breath should bid me spare,
Nor all the sacred prevalence of prayer.
Could I myself the bloody banquet join!
No--to the dogs that carcase I resign.
Should Troy, to bribe me, bring forth all her store,
And giving thousands, offer thousands more;
Should Dardan Priam, and his weeping dame,
Drain their whole realm to buy one funeral flame:
Their Hector on the pile they should not see,
Nor rob the vultures of one limb of thee."

Then thus the chief his dying accents drew:
"Thy rage, implacable! too well I knew:
The Furies that relentless breast have steel'd,
And cursed thee with a heart that cannot yield.
Yet think, a day will come, when fate's decree
And angry gods shall wreak this wrong on thee;
Phoebus and Paris shall avenge my fate,
And stretch thee here before the Scaean gate."

He ceased. The Fates suppress'd his labouring breath,
And his eyes stiffen'd at the hand of death;
To the dark realm the spirit wings its way,
(The manly body left a load of clay,)
And plaintive glides along the dreary coast,
A naked, wandering, melancholy ghost!

Achilles, musing as he roll'd his eyes
O'er the dead hero, thus unheard, replies:
"Die thou the first! When Jove and heaven ordain,
I follow thee"--He said, and stripp'd the slain.
Then forcing backward from the gaping wound
The reeking javelin, cast it on the ground.
The thronging Greeks behold with wondering eyes
His manly beauty and superior size;
While some, ignobler, the great dead deface
With wounds ungenerous, or with taunts disgrace:

"How changed that Hector, who like Jove of late
Sent lightning on our fleets, and scatter'd fate!"

High o'er the slain the great Achilles stands,
Begirt with heroes and surrounding bands;
And thus aloud, while all the host attends:
"Princes and leaders! countrymen and friends!
Since now at length the powerful will of heaven
The dire destroyer to our arm has given,
Is not Troy fallen already? Haste, ye powers!
See, if already their deserted towers
Are left unmann'd; or if they yet retain
The souls of heroes, their great Hector slain.
But what is Troy, or glory what to me?
Or why reflects my mind on aught but thee,
Divine Patroclus! Death hath seal'd his eyes;
Unwept, unhonour'd, uninterr'd he lies!
Can his dear image from my soul depart,
Long as the vital spirit moves my heart?
If in the melancholy shades below,
The flames of friends and lovers cease to glow,
Yet mine shall sacred last; mine, undecay'd,
Burn on through death, and animate my shade.
Meanwhile, ye sons of Greece, in triumph bring
The corpse of Hector, and your paeans sing.
Be this the song, slow-moving toward the shore,
"Hector is dead, and Ilion is no more."

Then his fell soul a thought of vengeance bred;
(Unworthy of himself, and of the dead;)
The nervous ancles bored, his feet he bound
With thongs inserted through the double wound;
These fix'd up high behind the rolling wain,
His graceful head was trail'd along the plain.
Proud on his car the insulting victor stood,
And bore aloft his arms, distilling blood.
He smites the steeds; the rapid chariot flies;
The sudden clouds of circling dust arise.
Now lost is all that formidable air;
The face divine, and long-descending hair,
Purple the ground, and streak the sable sand;
Deform'd, dishonour'd, in his native land,
Given to the rage of an insulting throng,
And, in his parents' sight, now dragg'd along!

The mother first beheld with sad survey;
She rent her tresses, venerable grey,
And cast, far off, the regal veils away.
With piercing shrieks his bitter fate she moans,
While the sad father answers groans with groans
Tears after tears his mournful cheeks o'erflow,
And the whole city wears one face of woe:
No less than if the rage of hostile fires.
From her foundations curling to her spires,
O'er the proud citadel at length should rise,
And the last blaze send Ilion to the skies.
The wretched monarch of the falling state,
Distracted, presses to the Dardan gate.
Scarce the whole people stop his desperate course,
While strong affliction gives the feeble force:
Grief tears his heart, and drives him to and fro,
In all the raging impotence of woe.
At length he roll'd in dust, and thus begun,
Imploring all, and naming one by one:
"Ah! let me, let me go where sorrow calls;
I, only I, will issue from your walls
(Guide or companion, friends! I ask ye none),
And bow before the murderer of my son.
My grief perhaps his pity may engage;
Perhaps at least he may respect my age.
He has a father too; a man like me;
One, not exempt from age and misery
(Vigorous no more, as when his young embrace
Begot this pest of me, and all my race).
How many valiant sons, in early bloom,
Has that cursed hand send headlong to the tomb!
Thee, Hector! last: thy loss (divinely brave)
Sinks my sad soul with sorrow to the grave.
O had thy gentle spirit pass'd in peace,
The son expiring in the sire's embrace,
While both thy parents wept the fatal hour,
And, bending o'er thee, mix'd the tender shower!
Some comfort that had been, some sad relief,
To melt in full satiety of grief!"

Thus wail'd the father, grovelling on the ground,
And all the eyes of Ilion stream'd around.

Amidst her matrons Hecuba appears:
(A mourning princess, and a train in tears;)
"Ah why has Heaven prolong'd this hated breath,
Patient of horrors, to behold thy death?
O Hector! late thy parents' pride and joy,
The boast of nations! the defence of Troy!
To whom her safety and her fame she owed;
Her chief, her hero, and almost her god!
O fatal change! become in one sad day
A senseless corse! inanimated clay!"

But not as yet the fatal news had spread
To fair Andromache, of Hector dead;
As yet no messenger had told his fate,
Not e'en his stay without the Scaean gate.
Far in the close recesses of the dome,
Pensive she plied the melancholy loom;
A growing work employ'd her secret hours,
Confusedly gay with intermingled flowers.
Her fair-haired handmaids heat the brazen urn,
The bath preparing for her lord's return
In vain; alas! her lord returns no more;
Unbathed he lies, and bleeds along the shore!
Now from the walls the clamours reach her ear,
And all her members shake with sudden fear:
Forth from her ivory hand the shuttle falls,
And thus, astonish'd, to her maids she calls:

"Ah follow me! (she cried) what plaintive noise
Invades my ear? 'Tis sure my mother's voice.
My faltering knees their trembling frame desert,
A pulse unusual flutters at my heart;
Some strange disaster, some reverse of fate
(Ye gods avert it!) threats the Trojan state.
Far be the omen which my thoughts suggest!
But much I fear my Hector's dauntless breast
Confronts Achilles; chased along the plain,
Shut from our walls! I fear, I fear him slain!
Safe in the crowd he ever scorn'd to wait,
And sought for glory in the jaws of fate:
Perhaps that noble heat has cost his breath,
Now quench'd for ever in the arms of death."

She spoke: and furious, with distracted pace,
Fears in her heart, and anguish in her face,
Flies through the dome (the maids her steps pursue),
And mounts the walls, and sends around her view.
Too soon her eyes the killing object found,
The godlike Hector dragg'd along the ground.
A sudden darkness shades her swimming eyes:
She faints, she falls; her breath, her colour flies.
Her hair's fair ornaments, the braids that bound,
The net that held them, and the wreath that crown'd,
The veil and diadem flew far away
(The gift of Venus on her bridal day).
Around a train of weeping sisters stands,
To raise her sinking with assistant hands.
Scarce from the verge of death recall'd, again
She faints, or but recovers to complain.

"O wretched husband of a wretched wife!
Born with one fate, to one unhappy life!
For sure one star its baneful beam display'd
On Priam's roof, and Hippoplacia's shade.
From different parents, different climes we came.
At different periods, yet our fate the same!
Why was my birth to great Aetion owed,
And why was all that tender care bestow'd?
Would I had never been!--O thou, the ghost
Of my dead husband! miserably lost!
Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone!
And I abandon'd, desolate, alone!
An only child, once comfort of my pains,
Sad product now of hapless love, remains!
No more to smile upon his sire; no friend
To help him now! no father to defend!
For should he 'scape the sword, the common doom,
What wrongs attend him, and what griefs to come!
Even from his own paternal roof expell'd,
Some stranger ploughs his patrimonial field.
The day, that to the shades the father sends,
Robs the sad orphan of his father's friends:
He, wretched outcast of mankind! appears
For ever sad, for ever bathed in tears;
Amongst the happy, unregarded, he
Hangs on the robe, or trembles at the knee,
While those his father's former bounty fed
Nor reach the goblet, nor divide the bread:
The kindest but his present wants allay,
To leave him wretched the succeeding day.
Frugal compassion! Heedless, they who boast
Both parents still, nor feel what he has lost,
Shall cry, 'Begone! thy father feasts not here:'
The wretch obeys, retiring with a tear.
Thus wretched, thus retiring all in tears,
To my sad soul Astyanax appears!
Forced by repeated insults to return,
And to his widow'd mother vainly mourn:
He, who, with tender delicacy bred,
With princes sported, and on dainties fed,
And when still evening gave him up to rest,
Sunk soft in down upon the nurse's breast,
Must--ah what must he not? Whom Ilion calls
Astyanax, from her well-guarded walls,
Is now that name no more, unhappy boy!
Since now no more thy father guards his Troy.
But thou, my Hector, liest exposed in air,
Far from thy parents' and thy consort's care;
Whose hand in vain, directed by her love,
The martial scarf and robe of triumph wove.
Now to devouring flames be these a prey,
Useless to thee, from this accursed day!
Yet let the sacrifice at least be paid,
An honour to the living, not the dead!"

So spake the mournful dame: her matrons hear,
Sigh back her sighs, and answer tear with tear.

Thus humbled in the dust, the pensive train
Through the sad city mourn'd her hero slain.
The body soil'd with dust, and black with gore,
Lies on broad Hellespont's resounding shore.
The Grecians seek their ships, and clear the strand,
All, but the martial Myrmidonian band:
These yet assembled great Achilles holds,
And the stern purpose of his mind unfolds:

"Not yet, my brave companions of the war,
Release your smoking coursers from the car;
But, with his chariot each in order led,
Perform due honours to Patroclus dead.
Ere yet from rest or food we seek relief,
Some rites remain, to glut our rage of grief."

The troops obey'd; and thrice in order led
(Achilles first) their coursers round the dead;
And thrice their sorrows and laments renew;
Tears bathe their arms, and tears the sands bedew.
For such a warrior Thetis aids their woe,
Melts their strong hearts, and bids their eyes to flow.
But chief, Pelides: thick-succeeding sighs
Burst from his heart, and torrents from his eyes:
His slaughtering hands, yet red with blood, he laid
On his dead friend's cold breast, and thus he said:

"All hail, Patroclus! let thy honour'd ghost
Hear, and rejoice on Pluto's dreary coast;
Behold! Achilles' promise is complete;
The bloody Hector stretch'd before thy feet.
Lo! to the dogs his carcase I resign;
And twelve sad victims, of the Trojan line,
Sacred to vengeance, instant shall expire;
Their lives effused around thy funeral pyre."

Gloomy he said, and (horrible to view)
Before the bier the bleeding Hector threw,
Prone on the dust. The Myrmidons around
Unbraced their armour, and the steeds unbound.
All to Achilles' sable ship repair,
Frequent and full, the genial feast to share.
Now from the well-fed swine black smokes aspire,
The bristly victims hissing o'er the fire:
The huge ox bellowing falls; with feebler cries
Expires the goat; the sheep in silence dies.
Around the hero's prostrate body flow'd,
In one promiscuous stream, the reeking blood.
And now a band of Argive monarchs brings
The glorious victor to the king of kings.
From his dead friend the pensive warrior went,
With steps unwilling, to the regal tent.
The attending heralds, as by office bound,
With kindled flames the tripod-vase surround:
To cleanse his conquering hands from hostile gore,
They urged in vain; the chief refused, and swore:

"No drop shall touch me, by almighty Jove!
The first and greatest of the gods above!
Till on the pyre I place thee; till I rear
The grassy mound, and clip thy sacred hair.
Some ease at least those pious rites may give,
And soothe my sorrows, while I bear to live.
Howe'er, reluctant as I am, I stay
And share your feast; but with the dawn of day,
(O king of men!) it claims thy royal care,
That Greece the warrior's funeral pile prepare,
And bid the forests fall: (such rites are paid
To heroes slumbering in eternal shade:)
Then, when his earthly part shall mount in fire,
Let the leagued squadrons to their posts retire."

He spoke: they hear him, and the word obey;
The rage of hunger and of thirst allay,
Then ease in sleep the labours of the day.
But great Pelides, stretch'd along the shore,
Where, dash'd on rocks, the broken billows roar,
Lies inly groaning; while on either hand
The martial Myrmidons confusedly stand.
Along the grass his languid members fall,
Tired with his chase around the Trojan wall;
Hush'd by the murmurs of the rolling deep,
At length he sinks in the soft arms of sleep.
When lo! the shade, before his closing eyes,
Of sad Patroclus rose, or seem'd to rise:
In the same robe he living wore, he came:
In stature, voice, and pleasing look, the same.
The form familiar hover'd o'er his head,
"And sleeps Achilles? (thus the phantom said:)
Sleeps my Achilles, his Patroclus dead?
Living, I seem'd his dearest, tenderest care,
But now forgot, I wander in the air.
Let my pale corse the rites of burial know,
And give me entrance in the realms below:
Till then the spirit finds no resting-place,
But here and there the unbodied spectres chase
The vagrant dead around the dark abode,
Forbid to cross the irremeable flood.
Now give thy hand; for to the farther shore
When once we pass, the soul returns no more:
When once the last funereal flames ascend,
No more shall meet Achilles and his friend;
No more our thoughts to those we loved make known;
Or quit the dearest, to converse alone.
Me fate has sever'd from the sons of earth,
The fate fore-doom'd that waited from my birth:
Thee too it waits; before the Trojan wall
Even great and godlike thou art doom'd to fall.
Hear then; and as in fate and love we join,
Ah suffer that my bones may rest with thine!
Together have we lived; together bred,
One house received us, and one table fed;
That golden urn, thy goddess-mother gave,
May mix our ashes in one common grave."

"And is it thou? (he answers) To my sight
Once more return'st thou from the realms of night?
O more than brother! Think each office paid,
Whate'er can rest a discontented shade;
But grant one last embrace, unhappy boy!
Afford at least that melancholy joy."

He said, and with his longing arms essay'd
In vain to grasp the visionary shade!
Like a thin smoke he sees the spirit fly,
And hears a feeble, lamentable cry.
Confused he wakes; amazement breaks the bands
Of golden sleep, and starting from the sands,
Pensive he muses with uplifted hands:

"'Tis true, 'tis certain; man, though dead, retains
Part of himself; the immortal mind remains:
The form subsists without the body's aid,
Aerial semblance, and an empty shade!
This night my friend, so late in battle lost,
Stood at my side, a pensive, plaintive ghost:
Even now familiar, as in life, he came;
Alas! how different! yet how like the same!"

Thus while he spoke, each eye grew big with tears:
And now the rosy-finger'd morn appears,
Shows every mournful face with tears o'erspread,
And glares on the pale visage of the dead.
But Agamemnon, as the rites demand,
With mules and waggons sends a chosen band
To load the timber, and the pile to rear;
A charge consign'd to Merion's faithful care.
With proper instruments they take the road,
Axes to cut, and ropes to sling the load.
First march the heavy mules, securely slow,
O'er hills, o'er dales, o'er crags, o'er rocks they go:
Jumping, high o'er the shrubs of the rough ground,
Rattle the clattering cars, and the shock'd axles bound
But when arrived at Ida's spreading woods,
(Fair Ida, water'd with descending floods,)
Loud sounds the axe, redoubling strokes on strokes;
On all sides round the forest hurls her oaks
Headlong. Deep echoing groan the thickets brown;
Then rustling, crackling, crashing, thunder down.
The wood the Grecians cleave, prepared to burn;
And the slow mules the same rough road return
The sturdy woodmen equal burdens bore
(Such charge was given them) to the sandy shore;
There on the spot which great Achilles show'd,
They eased their shoulders, and disposed the load;
Circling around the place, where times to come
Shall view Patroclus' and Achilles' tomb.
The hero bids his martial troops appear
High on their cars in all the pomp of war;
Each in refulgent arms his limbs attires,
All mount their chariots, combatants and squires.
The chariots first proceed, a shining train;
Then clouds of foot that smoke along the plain;
Next these the melancholy band appear;
Amidst, lay dead Patroclus on the bier;
O'er all the corse their scattered locks they throw;
Achilles next, oppress'd with mighty woe,
Supporting with his hands the hero's head,
Bends o'er the extended body of the dead.
Patroclus decent on the appointed ground
They place, and heap the sylvan pile around.
But great Achilles stands apart in prayer,
And from his head divides the yellow hair;
Those curling locks which from his youth he vow'd,
And sacred grew, to Sperchius' honour'd flood:
Then sighing, to the deep his locks he cast,
And roll'd his eyes around the watery waste:

"Sperchius! whose waves in mazy errors lost
Delightful roll along my native coast!
To whom we vainly vow'd, at our return,
These locks to fall, and hecatombs to burn:
Full fifty rams to bleed in sacrifice,
Where to the day thy silver fountains rise,
And where in shade of consecrated bowers
Thy altars stand, perfumed with native flowers!
So vow'd my father, but he vow'd in vain;
No more Achilles sees his native plain;
In that vain hope these hairs no longer grow,
Patroclus bears them to the shades below."

Thus o'er Patroclus while the hero pray'd,
On his cold hand the sacred lock he laid.
Once more afresh the Grecian sorrows flow:
And now the sun had set upon their woe;
But to the king of men thus spoke the chief:
"Enough, Atrides! give the troops relief:
Permit the mourning legions to retire,
And let the chiefs alone attend the pyre;
The pious care be ours, the dead to burn--"
He said: the people to their ships return:
While those deputed to inter the slain
Heap with a rising pyramid the plain.
A hundred foot in length, a hundred wide,
The growing structure spreads on every side;
High on the top the manly corse they lay,
And well-fed sheep and sable oxen slay:
Achilles covered with their fat the dead,
And the piled victims round the body spread;
Then jars of honey, and of fragrant oil,
Suspends around, low-bending o'er the pile.
Four sprightly coursers, with a deadly groan
Pour forth their lives, and on the pyre are thrown.
Of nine large dogs, domestic at his board,
Fall two, selected to attend their lord,
Then last of all, and horrible to tell,
Sad sacrifice! twelve Trojan captives fell.
On these the rage of fire victorious preys,
Involves and joins them in one common blaze.
Smear'd with the bloody rites, he stands on high,
And calls the spirit with a dreadful cry:

"All hail, Patroclus! let thy vengeful ghost
Hear, and exult, on Pluto's dreary coast.
Behold Achilles' promise fully paid,
Twelve Trojan heroes offer'd to thy shade;
But heavier fates on Hector's corse attend,
Saved from the flames, for hungry dogs to rend."

So spake he, threatening: but the gods made vain
His threat, and guard inviolate the slain:
Celestial Venus hover'd o'er his head,
And roseate unguents, heavenly fragrance! shed:
She watch'd him all the night and all the day,
And drove the bloodhounds from their destined prey.
Nor sacred Phoebus less employ'd his care;
He pour'd around a veil of gather'd air,
And kept the nerves undried, the flesh entire,
Against the solar beam and Sirian fire.

Nor yet the pile, where dead Patroclus lies,
Smokes, nor as yet the sullen flames arise;
But, fast beside, Achilles stood in prayer,
Invoked the gods whose spirit moves the air,
And victims promised, and libations cast,
To gentle Zephyr and the Boreal blast:
He call'd the aerial powers, along the skies
To breathe, and whisper to the fires to rise.
The winged Iris heard the hero's call,
And instant hasten'd to their airy hall,
Where in old Zephyr's open courts on high,
Sat all the blustering brethren of the sky.
She shone amidst them, on her painted bow;
The rocky pavement glitter'd with the show.
All from the banquet rise, and each invites
The various goddess to partake the rites.
"Not so (the dame replied), I haste to go
To sacred Ocean, and the floods below:
Even now our solemn hecatombs attend,
And heaven is feasting on the world's green end
With righteous Ethiops (uncorrupted train!)
Far on the extremest limits of the main.
But Peleus' son entreats, with sacrifice,
The western spirit, and the north, to rise!
Let on Patroclus' pile your blast be driven,
And bear the blazing honours high to heaven."

Swift as the word she vanish'd from their view;
Swift as the word the winds tumultuous flew;
Forth burst the stormy band with thundering roar,
And heaps on heaps the clouds are toss'd before.
To the wide main then stooping from the skies,
The heaving deeps in watery mountains rise:
Troy feels the blast along her shaking walls,
Till on the pile the gather'd tempest falls.
The structure crackles in the roaring fires,
And all the night the plenteous flame aspires.
All night Achilles hails Patroclus' soul,
With large libations from the golden bowl.
As a poor father, helpless and undone,
Mourns o'er the ashes of an only son,
Takes a sad pleasure the last bones to burn,
And pours in tears, ere yet they close the urn:
So stay'd Achilles, circling round the shore,
So watch'd the flames, till now they flame no more.
'Twas when, emerging through the shades of night.
The morning planet told the approach of light;
And, fast behind, Aurora's warmer ray
O'er the broad ocean pour'd the golden day:
Then sank the blaze, the pile no longer burn'd,
And to their caves the whistling winds return'd:
Across the Thracian seas their course they bore;
The ruffled seas beneath their passage roar.

Then parting from the pile he ceased to weep,
And sank to quiet in the embrace of sleep,
Exhausted with his grief: meanwhile the crowd
Of thronging Grecians round Achilles stood;
The tumult waked him: from his eyes he shook
Unwilling slumber, and the chiefs bespoke:

"Ye kings and princes of the Achaian name!
First let us quench the yet remaining flame
With sable wine; then, as the rites direct,
The hero's bones with careful view select:
(Apart, and easy to be known they lie
Amidst the heap, and obvious to the eye:
The rest around the margin will be seen
Promiscuous, steeds and immolated men:)
These wrapp'd in double cauls of fat, prepare;
And in the golden vase dispose with care;
There let them rest with decent honour laid,
Till I shall follow to the infernal shade.
Meantime erect the tomb with pious hands,
A common structure on the humble sands:
Hereafter Greece some nobler work may raise,
And late posterity record our praise!"

The Greeks obey; where yet the embers glow,
Wide o'er the pile the sable wine they throw,
And deep subsides the ashy heap below.
Next the white bones his sad companions place,
With tears collected, in the golden vase.
The sacred relics to the tent they bore;
The urn a veil of linen covered o'er.
That done, they bid the sepulchre aspire,
And cast the deep foundations round the pyre;
High in the midst they heap the swelling bed
Of rising earth, memorial of the dead.

The swarming populace the chief detains,
And leads amidst a wide extent of plains;
There placed them round: then from the ships proceeds
A train of oxen, mules, and stately steeds,
Vases and tripods (for the funeral games),
Resplendent brass, and more resplendent dames.
First stood the prizes to reward the force
Of rapid racers in the dusty course:
A woman for the first, in beauty's bloom,
Skill'd in the needle, and the labouring loom;
And a large vase, where two bright handles rise,
Of twenty measures its capacious size.
The second victor claims a mare unbroke,
Big with a mule, unknowing of the yoke:
The third, a charger yet untouch'd by flame;
Four ample measures held the shining frame:
Two golden talents for the fourth were placed:
An ample double bowl contents the last.
These in fair order ranged upon the plain,
The hero, rising, thus address'd the train:

"Behold the prizes, valiant Greeks! decreed
To the brave rulers of the racing steed;
Prizes which none beside ourself could gain,
Should our immortal coursers take the plain;
(A race unrivall'd, which from ocean's god
Peleus received, and on his son bestow'd.)
But this no time our vigour to display;
Nor suit, with them, the games of this sad day:
Lost is Patroclus now, that wont to deck
Their flowing manes, and sleek their glossy neck.
Sad, as they shared in human grief, they stand,
And trail those graceful honours on the sand!
Let others for the noble task prepare,
Who trust the courser and the flying car."

Fired at his word the rival racers rise;
But far the first Eumelus hopes the prize,
Famed though Pieria for the fleetest breed,
And skill'd to manage the high-bounding steed.
With equal ardour bold Tydides swell'd,
The steeds of Tros beneath his yoke compell'd
(Which late obey'd the Dardan chiefs command,
When scarce a god redeem'd him from his hand).
Then Menelaus his Podargus brings,
And the famed courser of the king of kings:
Whom rich Echepolus (more rich than brave),
To 'scape the wars, to Agamemnon gave,
(the her name) at home to end his days;
Base wealth preferring to eternal praise.
Next him Antilochus demands the course
With beating heart, and cheers his Pylian horse.
Experienced Nestor gives his son the reins,
Directs his judgment, and his heat restrains;
Nor idly warns the hoary sire, nor hears
The prudent son with unattending ears.

"My son! though youthful ardour fire thy breast,
The gods have loved thee, and with arts have bless'd;
Neptune and Jove on thee conferr'd the skill
Swift round the goal to turn the flying wheel.
To guide thy conduct little precept needs;
But slow, and past their vigour, are my steeds.
Fear not thy rivals, though for swiftness known;
Compare those rivals' judgment and thy own:
It is not strength, but art, obtains the prize,
And to be swift is less than to be wise.
'Tis more by art than force of numerous strokes
The dexterous woodman shapes the stubborn oaks;
By art the pilot, through the boiling deep
And howling tempest, steers the fearless ship;
And 'tis the artist wins the glorious course;
Not those who trust in chariots and in horse.
In vain, unskilful to the goal they strive,
And short, or wide, the ungovern'd courser drive:
While with sure skill, though with inferior steeds,
The knowing racer to his end proceeds;
Fix'd on the goal his eye foreruns the course,
His hand unerring steers the steady horse,
And now contracts, or now extends the rein,
Observing still the foremost on the plain.
Mark then the goal, 'tis easy to be found;
Yon aged trunk, a cubit from the ground;
Of some once stately oak the last remains,
Or hardy fir, unperish'd with the rains:
Inclosed with stones, conspicuous from afar;
And round, a circle for the wheeling car.
(Some tomb perhaps of old, the dead to grace;
Or then, as now, the limit of a race.)
Bear close to this, and warily proceed,
A little bending to the left-hand steed;
But urge the right, and give him all the reins;
While thy strict hand his fellow's head restrains,
And turns him short; till, doubling as they roll,
The wheel's round naves appear to brush the goal.
Yet (not to break the car, or lame the horse)
Clear of the stony heap direct the course;
Lest through incaution failing, thou mayst be
A joy to others, a reproach to me.
So shalt thou pass the goal, secure of mind,
And leave unskilful swiftness far behind:
Though thy fierce rival drove the matchless steed
Which bore Adrastus, of celestial breed;
Or the famed race, through all the regions known,
That whirl'd the car of proud Laomedon."

Thus (nought unsaid) the much-advising sage
Concludes; then sat, stiff with unwieldy age.
Next bold Meriones was seen to rise,
The last, but not least ardent for the prize.
They mount their seats; the lots their place dispose
(Roll'd in his helmet, these Achilles throws).
Young Nestor leads the race: Eumelus then;
And next the brother of the king of men:
Thy lot, Meriones, the fourth was cast;
And, far the bravest, Diomed, was last.
They stand in order, an impatient train:
Pelides points the barrier on the plain,
And sends before old Phoenix to the place,
To mark the racers, and to judge the race.
At once the coursers from the barrier bound;
The lifted scourges all at once resound;
Their heart, their eyes, their voice, they send before;
And up the champaign thunder from the shore:
Thick, where they drive, the dusty clouds arise,
And the lost courser in the whirlwind flies;
Loose on their shoulders the long manes reclined,
Float in their speed, and dance upon the wind:
The smoking chariots, rapid as they bound,
Now seem to touch the sky, and now the ground.
While hot for fame, and conquest all their care,
(Each o'er his flying courser hung in air,)
Erect with ardour, poised upon the rein,
They pant, they stretch, they shout along the plain.
Now (the last compass fetch'd around the goal)
At the near prize each gathers all his soul,
Each burns with double hope, with double pain,
Tears up the shore, and thunders toward the main.
First flew Eumelus on Pheretian steeds;
With those of Tros bold Diomed succeeds:
Close on Eumelus' back they puff the wind,
And seem just mounting on his car behind;
Full on his neck he feels the sultry breeze,
And, hovering o'er, their stretching shadows sees.
Then had he lost, or left a doubtful prize;
But angry Phoebus to Tydides flies,
Strikes from his hand the scourge, and renders vain
His matchless horses' labour on the plain.
Rage fills his eye with anguish, to survey
Snatch'd from his hope the glories of the day.
The fraud celestial Pallas sees with pain,
Springs to her knight, and gives the scourge again,
And fills his steeds with vigour. At a stroke
She breaks his rival's chariot from the yoke:
No more their way the startled horses held;
The car reversed came rattling on the field;
Shot headlong from his seat, beside the wheel,
Prone on the dust the unhappy master fell;
His batter'd face and elbows strike the ground;
Nose, mouth, and front, one undistinguish'd wound:
Grief stops his voice, a torrent drowns his eyes:
Before him far the glad Tydides flies;
Minerva's spirit drives his matchless pace,
And crowns him victor of the labour'd race.

The next, though distant, Menelaus succeeds;
While thus young Nestor animates his steeds:
"Now, now, my generous pair, exert your force;
Not that we hope to match Tydides' horse,
Since great Minerva wings their rapid way,
And gives their lord the honours of the day;
But reach Atrides! shall his mare outgo
Your swiftness? vanquish'd by a female foe?
Through your neglect, if lagging on the plain
The last ignoble gift be all we gain,
No more shall Nestor's hand your food supply,
The old man's fury rises, and ye die.
Haste then: yon narrow road, before our sight,
Presents the occasion, could we use it right."

Thus he. The coursers at their master's threat
With quicker steps the sounding champaign beat.
And now Antilochus with nice survey
Observes the compass of the hollow way.
'Twas where, by force of wintry torrents torn,
Fast by the road a precipice was worn:
Here, where but one could pass, to shun the throng
The Spartan hero's chariot smoked along.
Close up the venturous youth resolves to keep,
Still edging near, and bears him toward the steep.
Atrides, trembling, casts his eye below,
And wonders at the rashness of his foe.
"Hold, stay your steeds--What madness thus to ride
This narrow way! take larger field (he cried),
Or both must fall."--Atrides cried in vain;
He flies more fast, and throws up all the rein.
Far as an able arm the disk can send,
When youthful rivals their full force extend,
So far, Antilochus! thy chariot flew
Before the king: he, cautious, backward drew
His horse compell'd; foreboding in his fears
The rattling ruin of the clashing cars,
The floundering coursers rolling on the plain,
And conquest lost through frantic haste to gain.
But thus upbraids his rival as he flies:
"Go, furious youth! ungenerous and unwise!
Go, but expect not I'll the prize resign;
Add perjury to fraud, and make it thine--"
Then to his steeds with all his force he cries,
"Be swift, be vigorous, and regain the prize!
Your rivals, destitute of youthful force,
With fainting knees shall labour in the course,
And yield the glory yours."--The steeds obey;
Already at their heels they wing their way,
And seem already to retrieve the day.

Meantime the Grecians in a ring beheld
The coursers bounding o'er the dusty field.
The first who mark'd them was the Cretan king;
High on a rising ground, above the ring,
The monarch sat: from whence with sure survey
He well observed the chief who led the way,
And heard from far his animating cries,
And saw the foremost steed with sharpen'd eyes;
On whose broad front a blaze of shining white,
Like the full moon, stood obvious to the sight.
He saw; and rising, to the Greeks begun:
"Are yonder horse discern'd by me alone?
Or can ye, all, another chief survey,
And other steeds than lately led the way?
Those, though the swiftest, by some god withheld,
Lie sure disabled in the middle field:
For, since the goal they doubled, round the plain
I search to find them, but I search in vain.
Perchance the reins forsook the driver's hand,
And, turn'd too short, he tumbled on the strand,
Shot from the chariot; while his coursers stray
With frantic fury from the destined way.
Rise then some other, and inform my sight,
For these dim eyes, perhaps, discern not right;
Yet sure he seems, to judge by shape and air,
The great tolian chief, renown'd in war."

"Old man! (Oileus rashly thus replies)
Thy tongue too hastily confers the prize;
Of those who view the course, nor sharpest eyed,
Nor youngest, yet the readiest to decide.
Eumelus' steeds, high bounding in the chase,
Still, as at first, unrivall'd lead the race:
I well discern him, as he shakes the rein,
And hear his shouts victorious o'er the plain."

Thus he. Idomeneus, incensed, rejoin'd:
"Barbarous of words! and arrogant of mind!
Contentious prince, of all the Greeks beside
The last in merit, as the first in pride!
To vile reproach what answer can we make?
A goblet or a tripod let us stake,
And be the king the judge. The most unwise
Will learn their rashness, when they pay the price."

He said: and Ajax, by mad passion borne,
Stern had replied; fierce scorn enhancing scorn
To fell extremes. But Thetis' godlike son
Awful amidst them rose, and thus begun:

"Forbear, ye chiefs! reproachful to contend;
Much would ye blame, should others thus offend:
And lo! the approaching steeds your contest end."
No sooner had he spoke, but thundering near,
Drives, through a stream of dust, the charioteer.
High o'er his head the circling lash he wields:
His bounding horses scarcely touch the fields:
His car amidst the dusty whirlwind roll'd,
Bright with the mingled blaze of tin and gold,
Refulgent through the cloud: no eye could find
The track his flying wheels had left behind:
And the fierce coursers urged their rapid pace
So swift, it seem'd a flight, and not a race.
Now victor at the goal Tydides stands,
Quits his bright car, and springs upon the sands;
From the hot steeds the sweaty torrents stream;
The well-plied whip is hung athwart the beam:
With joy brave Sthenelus receives the prize,
The tripod-vase, and dame with radiant eyes:
These to the ships his train triumphant leads,
The chief himself unyokes the panting steeds.

Young Nestor follows (who by art, not force,
O'erpass'd Atrides) second in the course.
Behind, Atrides urged the race, more near
Than to the courser in his swift career
The following car, just touching with his heel
And brushing with his tail the whirling wheel:
Such, and so narrow now the space between
The rivals, late so distant on the green;
So soon swift the her lost ground regain'd,
One length, one moment, had the race obtain'd.

Merion pursued, at greater distance still,
With tardier coursers, and inferior skill.
Last came, Admetus! thy unhappy son;
Slow dragged the steeds his batter'd chariot on:
Achilles saw, and pitying thus begun:

"Behold! the man whose matchless art surpass'd
The sons of Greece! the ablest, yet the last!
Fortune denies, but justice bids us pay
(Since great Tydides bears the first away)
To him the second honours of the day."

The Greeks consent with loud-applauding cries,
And then Eumelus had received the prize,
But youthful Nestor, jealous of his fame,
The award opposes, and asserts his claim.
"Think not (he cries) I tamely will resign,
O Peleus' son! the mare so justly mine.
What if the gods, the skilful to confound,
Have thrown the horse and horseman to the ground?
Perhaps he sought not heaven by sacrifice,
And vows omitted forfeited the prize.
If yet (distinction to thy friend to show,
And please a soul desirous to bestow)
Some gift must grace Eumelus, view thy store
Of beauteous handmaids, steeds, and shining ore;
An ample present let him thence receive,
And Greece shall praise thy generous thirst to give.
But this my prize I never shall forego;
This, who but touches, warriors! is my foe."

Thus spake the youth; nor did his words offend;
Pleased with the well-turn'd flattery of a friend,
Achilles smiled: "The gift proposed (he cried),
Antilochus! we shall ourself provide.
With plates of brass the corslet cover'd o'er,
(The same renown'd Asteropaeus wore,)
Whose glittering margins raised with silver shine,
(No vulgar gift,) Eumelus! shall be thine."

He said: Automedon at his command
The corslet brought, and gave it to his hand.
Distinguish'd by his friend, his bosom glows
With generous joy: then Menelaus rose;
The herald placed the sceptre in his hands,
And still'd the clamour of the shouting bands.
Not without cause incensed at Nestor's son,
And inly grieving, thus the king begun:

"The praise of wisdom, in thy youth obtain'd,
An act so rash, Antilochus! has stain'd.
Robb'd of my glory and my just reward,
To you, O Grecians! be my wrong declared:
So not a leader shall our conduct blame,
Or judge me envious of a rival's fame.
But shall not we, ourselves, the truth maintain?
What needs appealing in a fact so plain?
What Greek shall blame me, if I bid thee rise,
And vindicate by oath th' ill-gotten prize?
Rise if thou darest, before thy chariot stand,
The driving scourge high-lifted in thy hand;
And touch thy steeds, and swear thy whole intent
Was but to conquer, not to circumvent.
Swear by that god whose liquid arms surround
The globe, and whose dread earthquakes heave the ground!"

The prudent chief with calm attention heard;
Then mildly thus: "Excuse, if youth have err'd;
Superior as thou art, forgive the offence,
Nor I thy equal, or in years, or sense.
Thou know'st the errors of unripen'd age,
Weak are its counsels, headlong is its rage.
The prize I quit, if thou thy wrath resign;
The mare, or aught thou ask'st, be freely thine
Ere I become (from thy dear friendship torn)
Hateful to thee, and to the gods forsworn."

So spoke Antilochus; and at the word
The mare contested to the king restored.
Joy swells his soul: as when the vernal grain
Lifts the green ear above the springing plain,
The fields their vegetable life renew,
And laugh and glitter with the morning dew;
Such joy the Spartan's shining face o'erspread,
And lifted his gay heart, while thus he said:

"Still may our souls, O generous youth! agree
'Tis now Atrides' turn to yield to thee.
Rash heat perhaps a moment might control,
Not break, the settled temper of thy soul.
Not but (my friend) 'tis still the wiser way
To waive contention with superior sway;
For ah! how few, who should like thee offend,
Like thee, have talents to regain the friend!
To plead indulgence, and thy fault atone,
Suffice thy father's merit and thy own:
Generous alike, for me, the sire and son
Have greatly suffer'd, and have greatly done.
I yield; that all may know, my soul can bend,
Nor is my pride preferr'd before my friend."

He said; and pleased his passion to command,
Resign'd the courser to Noemon's hand,
Friend of the youthful chief: himself content,
The shining charger to his vessel sent.
The golden talents Merion next obtain'd;
The fifth reward, the double bowl, remain'd.
Achilles this to reverend Nestor bears.
And thus the purpose of his gift declares:
"Accept thou this, O sacred sire! (he said)
In dear memorial of Patroclus dead;
Dead and for ever lost Patroclus lies,
For ever snatch'd from our desiring eyes!
Take thou this token of a grateful heart,
Though 'tis not thine to hurl the distant dart,
The quoit to toss, the ponderous mace to wield,
Or urge the race, or wrestle on the field:
Thy pristine vigour age has overthrown,
But left the glory of the past thy own."

He said, and placed the goblet at his side;
With joy the venerable king replied:

"Wisely and well, my son, thy words have proved
A senior honour'd, and a friend beloved!
Too true it is, deserted of my strength,
These wither'd arms and limbs have fail'd at length.
Oh! had I now that force I felt of yore,
Known through Buprasium and the Pylian shore!
Victorious then in every solemn game,
Ordain'd to Amarynces' mighty name;
The brave Epeians gave my glory way,
tolians, Pylians, all resign'd the day.
I quell'd Clytomedes in fights of hand,
And backward hurl'd Ancaeus on the sand,
Surpass'd Iphyclus in the swift career,
Phyleus and Polydorus with the spear.
The sons of Actor won the prize of horse,
But won by numbers, not by art or force:
For the famed twins, impatient to survey
Prize after prize by Nestor borne away,
Sprung to their car; and with united pains
One lash'd the coursers, while one ruled the reins.
Such once I was! Now to these tasks succeeds
A younger race, that emulate our deeds:
I yield, alas! (to age who must not yield?)
Though once the foremost hero of the field.
Go thou, my son! by generous friendship led,
With martial honours decorate the dead:
While pleased I take the gift thy hands present,
(Pledge of benevolence, and kind intent,)
Rejoiced, of all the numerous Greeks, to see
Not one but honours sacred age and me:
Those due distinctions thou so well canst pay,
May the just gods return another day!"

Proud of the gift, thus spake the full of days:
Achilles heard him, prouder of the praise.

The prizes next are order'd to the field,
For the bold champions who the caestus wield.
A stately mule, as yet by toils unbroke,
Of six years' age, unconscious of the yoke,
Is to the circus led, and firmly bound;
Next stands a goblet, massy, large, and round.
Achilles rising, thus: "Let Greece excite
Two heroes equal to this hardy fight;
Who dare the foe with lifted arms provoke,
And rush beneath the long-descending stroke.
On whom Apollo shall the palm bestow,
And whom the Greeks supreme by conquest know,
This mule his dauntless labours shall repay,
The vanquish'd bear the massy bowl away."

This dreadful combat great Epeus chose;
High o'er the crowd, enormous bulk! he rose,
And seized the beast, and thus began to say:
"Stand forth some man, to bear the bowl away!
(Price of his ruin: for who dares deny
This mule my right; the undoubted victor I)
Others, 'tis own'd, in fields of battle shine,
But the first honours of this fight are mine;
For who excels in all? Then let my foe
Draw near, but first his certain fortune know;
Secure this hand shall his whole frame confound,
Mash all his bones, and all his body pound:
So let his friends be nigh, a needful train,
To heave the batter'd carcase off the plain."

The giant spoke; and in a stupid gaze
The host beheld him, silent with amaze!
'Twas thou, Euryalus! who durst aspire
To meet his might, and emulate thy sire,
The great Mecistheus; who in days of yore
In Theban games the noblest trophy bore,
(The games ordain'd dead Oedipus to grace,)
And singly vanquish the Cadmean race.
Him great Tydides urges to contend,
Warm with the hopes of conquest for his friend;
Officious with the cincture girds him round;
And to his wrist the gloves of death are bound.
Amid the circle now each champion stands,
And poises high in air his iron hands;
With clashing gauntlets now they fiercely close,
Their crackling jaws re-echo to the blows,
And painful sweat from all their members flows.
At length Epeus dealt a weighty blow
Full on the cheek of his unwary foe;
Beneath that ponderous arm's resistless sway
Down dropp'd he, nerveless, and extended lay.
As a large fish, when winds and waters roar,
By some huge billow dash'd against the shore,
Lies panting; not less batter'd with his wound,
The bleeding hero pants upon the ground.
To rear his fallen foe, the victor lends,
Scornful, his hand; and gives him to his friends;
Whose arms support him, reeling through the throng,
And dragging his disabled legs along;
Nodding, his head hangs down his shoulder o'er;
His mouth and nostrils pour the clotted gore;
Wrapp'd round in mists he lies, and lost to thought;
His friends receive the bowl, too dearly bought.

The third bold game Achilles next demands,
And calls the wrestlers to the level sands:
A massy tripod for the victor lies,
Of twice six oxen its reputed price;
And next, the loser's spirits to restore,
A female captive, valued but at four.
Scarce did the chief the vigorous strife prop
When tower-like Ajax and Ulysses rose.
Amid the ring each nervous rival stands,
Embracing rigid with implicit hands.
Close lock'd above, their heads and arms are mix'd:
Below, their planted feet at distance fix'd;
Like two strong rafters which the builder forms,
Proof to the wintry winds and howling storms,
Their tops connected, but at wider space
Fix'd on the centre stands their solid base.
Now to the grasp each manly body bends;
The humid sweat from every pore descends;
Their bones resound with blows: sides, shoulders, thighs
Swell to each gripe, and bloody tumours rise.
Nor could Ulysses, for his art renown'd,
O'erturn the strength of Ajax on the ground;
Nor could the strength of Ajax overthrow
The watchful caution of his artful foe.
While the long strife even tired the lookers on,
Thus to Ulysses spoke great Telamon:
"Or let me lift thee, chief, or lift thou me:
Prove we our force, and Jove the rest decree."

He said; and, straining, heaved him off the ground
With matchless strength; that time Ulysses found
The strength to evade, and where the nerves combine
His ankle struck: the giant fell supine;
Ulysses, following, on his bosom lies;
Shouts of applause run rattling through the skies.
Ajax to lift Ulysses next essays;
He barely stirr'd him, but he could not raise:
His knee lock'd fast, the foe's attempt denied;
And grappling close, they tumbled side by side.
Defiled with honourable dust they roll,
Still breathing strife, and unsubdued of soul:
Again they rage, again to combat rise;
When great Achilles thus divides the prize:

"Your noble vigour, O my friends, restrain;
Nor weary out your generous strength in vain.
Ye both have won: let others who excel,
Now prove that prowess you have proved so well."

The hero's words the willing chiefs obey,
From their tired bodies wipe the dust away,
And, clothed anew, the following games survey.

And now succeed the gifts ordain'd to grace
The youths contending in the rapid race:
A silver urn that full six measures held,
By none in weight or workmanship excell'd:
Sidonian artists taught the frame to shine,
Elaborate, with artifice divine;
Whence Tyrian sailors did the prize transport,
And gave to Thoas at the Lemnian port:
From him descended, good Eunaeus heir'd
The glorious gift; and, for Lycaon spared,
To brave Patroclus gave the rich reward:
Now, the same hero's funeral rites to grace,
It stands the prize of swiftness in the race.
A well-fed ox was for the second placed;
And half a talent must content the last.
Achilles rising then bespoke the train:
"Who hope the palm of swiftness to obtain,
Stand forth, and bear these prizes from the plain."

The hero said, and starting from his place,
Oilean Ajax rises to the race;
Ulysses next; and he whose speed surpass'd
His youthful equals, Nestor's son, the last.
Ranged in a line the ready racers stand;
Pelides points the barrier with his hand;
All start at once; Oileus led the race;
The next Ulysses, measuring pace with pace;
Behind him, diligently close, he sped,
As closely following as the running thread
The spindle follows, and displays the charms
Of the fair spinster's breast and moving arms:
Graceful in motion thus, his foe he plies,
And treads each footstep ere the dust can rise;
His glowing breath upon his shoulders plays:
The admiring Greeks loud acclamations raise:
To him they give their wishes, hearts, and eyes,
And send their souls before him as he flies.
Now three times turn'd in prospect of the goal,
The panting chief to Pallas lifts his soul:
"Assist, O goddess!" thus in thought he pray'd!
And present at his thought descends the maid.
Buoy'd by her heavenly force, he seems to swim,
And feels a pinion lifting every limb.
All fierce, and ready now the prize to gain,
Unhappy Ajax stumbles on the plain
(O'erturn'd by Pallas), where the slippery shore
Was clogg'd with slimy dung and mingled gore.
(The self-same place beside Patroclus' pyre,
Where late the slaughter'd victims fed the fire.)
Besmear'd with filth, and blotted o'er with clay,
Obscene to sight, the rueful racer lay;
The well-fed bull (the second prize) he shared,
And left the urn Ulysses' rich reward.
Then, grasping by the horn the mighty beast,
The baffled hero thus the Greeks address'd:

"Accursed fate! the conquest I forego;
A mortal I, a goddess was my foe;
She urged her favourite on the rapid way,
And Pallas, not Ulysses, won the day."

Thus sourly wail'd he, sputtering dirt and gore;
A burst of laughter echoed through the shore.
Antilochus, more humorous than the rest,
Takes the last prize, and takes it with a jest:

"Why with our wiser elders should we strive?
The gods still love them, and they always thrive.
Ye see, to Ajax I must yield the prize:
He to Ulysses, still more aged and wise;
(A green old age unconscious of decays,
That proves the hero born in better days!)
Behold his vigour in this active race!
Achilles only boasts a swifter pace:
For who can match Achilles? He who can,
Must yet be more than hero, more than man."

The effect succeeds the speech. Pelides cries,
"Thy artful praise deserves a better prize.
Nor Greece in vain shall hear thy friend extoll'd;
Receive a talent of the purest gold."
The youth departs content. The host admire
The son of Nestor, worthy of his sire.

Next these a buckler, spear, and helm, he brings;
Cast on the plain, the brazen burden rings:
Arms which of late divine Sarpedon wore,
And great Patroclus in short triumph bore.
"Stand forth the bravest of our host! (he cries)
Whoever dares deserve so rich a prize,
Now grace the lists before our army's sight,
And sheathed in steel, provoke his foe to fight.
Who first the jointed armour shall explore,
And stain his rival's mail with issuing gore,
The sword Asteropaeus possess'd of old,
(A Thracian blade, distinct with studs of gold,)
Shall pay the stroke, and grace the striker's side:
These arms in common let the chiefs divide:
For each brave champion, when the combat ends,
A sumptuous banquet at our tents attends."

Fierce at the word uprose great Tydeus' son,
And the huge bulk of Ajax Telamon.
Clad in refulgent steel, on either hand,
The dreadful chiefs amid the circle stand;
Louring they meet, tremendous to the sight;
Each Argive bosom beats with fierce delight.
Opposed in arms not long they idly stood,
But thrice they closed, and thrice the charge renew'd.
A furious pass the spear of Ajax made
Through the broad shield, but at the corslet stay'd.
Not thus the foe: his javelin aim'd above
The buckler's margin, at the neck he drove.
But Greece, now trembling for her hero's life,
Bade share the honours, and surcease the strife.
Yet still the victor's due Tydides gains,
With him the sword and studded belt remains.

Then hurl'd the hero, thundering on the ground,
A mass of iron (an enormous round),
Whose weight and size the circling Greeks admire,
Rude from the furnace, and but shaped by fire.
This mighty quoit Aetion wont to rear,
And from his whirling arm dismiss in air;
The giant by Achilles slain, he stow'd
Among his spoils this memorable load.
For this, he bids those nervous artists vie,
That teach the disk to sound along the sky.
"Let him, whose might can hurl this bowl, arise;
Who farthest hurls it, take it as his prize;
If he be one enrich'd with large domain
Of downs for flocks, and arable for grain,
Small stock of iron needs that man provide;
His hinds and swains whole years shall be supplied
From hence; nor ask the neighbouring city's aid
For ploughshares, wheels, and all the rural trade."

Stern Polypoetes stepp'd before the throng,
And great Leonteus, more than mortal strong;
Whose force with rival forces to oppose,
Uprose great Ajax; up Epeus rose.
Each stood in order: first Epeus threw;
High o'er the wondering crowds the whirling circle flew.
Leonteus next a little space surpass'd;
And third, the strength of godlike Ajax cast.
O'er both their marks it flew; till fiercely flung
From Polypoetes' arm the discus sung:
Far as a swain his whirling sheephook throws,
That distant falls among the grazing cows,
So past them all the rapid circle flies:
His friends, while loud applauses shake the skies,
With force conjoin'd heave off the weighty prize.

Those, who in skilful archery contend,
He next invites the twanging bow to bend;
And twice ten axes casts amidst the round,
Ten double-edged, and ten that singly wound
The mast, which late a first-rate galley bore,
The hero fixes in the sandy shore;
To the tall top a milk-white dove they tie,
The trembling mark at which their arrows fly.

"Whose weapon strikes yon fluttering bird, shall bear
These two-edged axes, terrible in war;
The single, he whose shaft divides the cord."
He said: experienced Merion took the word;
And skilful Teucer: in the helm they threw
Their lots inscribed, and forth the latter flew.
Swift from the string the sounding arrow flies;
But flies unbless'd! No grateful sacrifice,
No firstling lambs, unheedful! didst thou vow
To Phoebus, patron of the shaft and bow.
For this, thy well-aim'd arrow turn'd aside,
Err'd from the dove, yet cut the cord that tied:
Adown the mainmast fell the parted string,
And the free bird to heaven displays her wing:
Sea, shores, and skies, with loud applause resound,
And Merion eager meditates the wound:
He takes the bow, directs the shaft above,
And following with his eye the soaring dove,
Implores the god to speed it through the skies,
With vows of firstling lambs, and grateful sacrific
The dove, in airy circles as she wheels,
Amid the clouds the piercing arrow feels;
Quite through and through the point its passage found,
And at his feet fell bloody to the ground.
The wounded bird, ere yet she breathed her last,
With flagging wings alighted on the mast,
A moment hung, and spread her pinions there,
Then sudden dropp'd, and left her life in air.
From the pleased crowd new peals of thunder rise,
And to the ships brave Merion bears the prize.

To close the funeral games, Achilles last
A massy spear amid the circle placed,
And ample charger of unsullied frame,
With flowers high-wrought, not blacken'd yet by flame.
For these he bids the heroes prove their art,
Whose dexterous skill directs the flying dart.
Here too great Merion hopes the noble prize;
Nor here disdain'd the king of men to rise.
With joy Pelides saw the honour paid,
Rose to the monarch, and respectful said:

"Thee first in virtue, as in power supreme,
O king of nations! all thy Greeks proclaim;
In every martial game thy worth attest,
And know thee both their greatest and their best.
Take then the prize, but let brave Merion bear
This beamy javelin in thy brother's war."

Pleased from the hero's lips his praise to hear,
The king to Merion gives the brazen spear:
But, set apart for sacred use, commands
The glittering charger to Talthybius' hands.

Now from the finish'd games the Grecian band
Seek their black ships, and clear the crowded strand,
All stretch'd at ease the genial banquet share,
And pleasing slumbers quiet all their care.
Not so Achilles: he, to grief resign'd,
His friend's dear image present to his mind,
Takes his sad couch, more unobserved to weep;
Nor tastes the gifts of all-composing sleep.
Restless he roll'd around his weary bed,
And all his soul on his Patroclus fed:
The form so pleasing, and the heart so kind,
That youthful vigour, and that manly mind,
What toils they shared, what martial works they wrought,
What seas they measured, and what fields they fought;
All pass'd before him in remembrance dear,
Thought follows thought, and tear succeeds to tear.
And now supine, now prone, the hero lay,
Now shifts his side, impatient for the day:
Then starting up, disconsolate he goes
Wide on the lonely beach to vent his woes.
There as the solitary mourner raves,
The ruddy morning rises o'er the waves:
Soon as it rose, his furious steeds he join'd!
The chariot flies, and Hector trails behind.
And thrice, Patroclus! round thy monument
Was Hector dragg'd, then hurried to the tent.
There sleep at last o'ercomes the hero's eyes;
While foul in dust the unhonour'd carcase lies,
But not deserted by the pitying skies:
For Phoebus watch'd it with superior care,
Preserved from gaping wounds and tainting air;
And, ignominious as it swept the field,
Spread o'er the sacred corse his golden shield.
All heaven was moved, and Hermes will'd to go
By stealth to snatch him from the insulting foe:
But Neptune this, and Pallas this denies,
And th' unrelenting empress of the skies,
E'er since that day implacable to Troy,
What time young Paris, simple shepherd boy,
Won by destructive lust (reward obscene),
Their charms rejected for the Cyprian queen.
But when the tenth celestial morning broke,
To heaven assembled, thus Apollo spoke:

"Unpitying powers! how oft each holy fane
Has Hector tinged with blood of victims slain?
And can ye still his cold remains pursue?
Still grudge his body to the Trojans' view?
Deny to consort, mother, son, and sire,
The last sad honours of a funeral fire?
Is then the dire Achilles all your care?
That iron heart, inflexibly severe;
A lion, not a man, who slaughters wide,
In strength of rage, and impotence of pride;
Who hastes to murder with a savage joy,
Invades around, and breathes but to destroy!
Shame is not of his soul; nor understood,
The greatest evil and the greatest good.
Still for one loss he rages unresign'd,
Repugnant to the lot of all mankind;
To lose a friend, a brother, or a son,
Heaven dooms each mortal, and its will is done:
Awhile they sorrow, then dismiss their care;
Fate gives the wound, and man is born to bear.
But this insatiate, the commission given
By fate exceeds, and tempts the wrath of heaven:
Lo, how his rage dishonest drags along
Hector's dead earth, insensible of wrong!
Brave though he be, yet by no reason awed,
He violates the laws of man and god."

"If equal honours by the partial skies
Are doom'd both heroes, (Juno thus replies,)
If Thetis' son must no distinction know,
Then hear, ye gods! the patron of the bow.
But Hector only boasts a mortal claim,
His birth deriving from a mortal dame:
Achilles, of your own ethereal race,
Springs from a goddess by a man's embrace
(A goddess by ourself to Peleus given,
A man divine, and chosen friend of heaven)
To grace those nuptials, from the bright abode
Yourselves were present; where this minstrel-god,
Well pleased to share the feast, amid the quire
Stood proud to hymn, and tune his youthful lyre."

Then thus the Thunderer checks the imperial dame:
"Let not thy wrath the court of heaven inflame;
Their merits, nor their honours, are the same.
But mine, and every god's peculiar grace
Hector deserves, of all the Trojan race:
Still on our shrines his grateful offerings lay,
(The only honours men to gods can pay,)
Nor ever from our smoking altar ceased
The pure libation, and the holy feast:
Howe'er by stealth to snatch the corse away,
We will not: Thetis guards it night and day.
But haste, and summon to our courts above
The azure queen; let her persuasion move
Her furious son from Priam to receive
The proffer'd ransom, and the corse to leave."

He added not: and Iris from the skies,
Swift as a whirlwind, on the message flies,
Meteorous the face of ocean sweeps,
Refulgent gliding o'er the sable deeps.
Between where Samos wide his forests spreads,
And rocky Imbrus lifts its pointed heads,
Down plunged the maid; (the parted waves resound;)
She plunged and instant shot the dark profound.
As bearing death in the fallacious bait,
From the bent angle sinks the leaden weight;
So pass'd the goddess through the closing wave,
Where Thetis sorrow'd in her secret cave:
There placed amidst her melancholy train
(The blue-hair'd sisters of the sacred main)
Pensive she sat, revolving fates to come,
And wept her godlike son's approaching doom.
Then thus the goddess of the painted bow:
"Arise, O Thetis! from thy seats below,
'Tis Jove that calls."--"And why (the dame replies)
Calls Jove his Thetis to the hated skies?
Sad object as I am for heavenly sight!
Ah may my sorrows ever shun the light!
Howe'er, be heaven's almighty sire obey'd--"
She spake, and veil'd her head in sable shade,
Which, flowing long, her graceful person clad;
And forth she paced, majestically sad.

Then through the world of waters they repair
(The way fair Iris led) to upper air.
The deeps dividing, o'er the coast they rise,
And touch with momentary flight the skies.
There in the lightning's blaze the sire they found,
And all the gods in shining synod round.
Thetis approach'd with anguish in her face,
(Minerva rising, gave the mourner place,)
Even Juno sought her sorrows to console,
And offer'd from her hand the nectar-bowl:
She tasted, and resign'd it: then began
The sacred sire of gods and mortal man:

"Thou comest, fair Thetis, but with grief o'ercast;
Maternal sorrows; long, ah, long to last!
Suffice, we know and we partake thy cares;
But yield to fate, and hear what Jove declares
Nine days are past since all the court above
In Hector's cause have moved the ear of Jove;
'Twas voted, Hermes from his godlike foe
By stealth should bear him, but we will'd not so:
We will, thy son himself the corse restore,
And to his conquest add this glory more.
Then hie thee to him, and our mandate bear:
Tell him he tempts the wrath of heaven too far;
Nor let him more (our anger if he dread)
Vent his mad vengeance on the sacred dead;
But yield to ransom and the father's prayer;
The mournful father, Iris shall prepare
With gifts to sue; and offer to his hands
Whate'er his honour asks, or heart demands."

His word the silver-footed queen attends,
And from Olympus' snowy tops descends.
Arrived, she heard the voice of loud lament,
And echoing groans that shook the lofty tent:
His friends prepare the victim, and dispose
Repast unheeded, while he vents his woes;
The goddess seats her by her pensive son,
She press'd his hand, and tender thus begun:

"How long, unhappy! shall thy sorrows flow,
And thy heart waste with life-consuming woe:
Mindless of food, or love, whose pleasing reign
Soothes weary life, and softens human pain?
O snatch the moments yet within thy power;
Not long to live, indulge the amorous hour!
Lo! Jove himself (for Jove's command I bear)
Forbids to tempt the wrath of heaven too far.
No longer then (his fury if thou dread)
Detain the relics of great Hector dead;
Nor vent on senseless earth thy vengeance vain,
But yield to ransom, and restore the slain."

To whom Achilles: "Be the ransom given,
And we submit, since such the will of heaven."

While thus they communed, from the Olympian bowers
Jove orders Iris to the Trojan towers:
"Haste, winged goddess! to the sacred town,
And urge her monarch to redeem his son.
Alone the Ilian ramparts let him leave,
And bear what stern Achilles may receive:
Alone, for so we will; no Trojan near
Except, to place the dead with decent care,
Some aged herald, who with gentle hand
May the slow mules and funeral car command.
Nor let him death, nor let him danger dread,
Safe through the foe by our protection led:
Him Hermes to Achilles shall convey,
Guard of his life, and partner of his way.
Fierce as he is, Achilles' self shall spare
His age, nor touch one venerable hair:
Some thought there must be in a soul so brave,
Some sense of duty, some desire to save."

Then down her bow the winged Iris drives,
And swift at Priam's mournful court arrives:
Where the sad sons beside their father's throne
Sat bathed in tears, and answer'd groan with groan.
And all amidst them lay the hoary sire,
(Sad scene of woe!) his face his wrapp'd attire
Conceal'd from sight; with frantic hands he spread
A shower of ashes o'er his neck and head.
From room to room his pensive daughters roam;
Whose shrieks and clamours fill the vaulted dome;
Mindful of those, who late their pride and joy,
Lie pale and breathless round the fields of Troy!
Before the king Jove's messenger appears,
And thus in whispers greets his trembling ears:

"Fear not, O father! no ill news I bear;
From Jove I come, Jove makes thee still his care;
For Hector's sake these walls he bids thee leave,
And bear what stern Achilles may receive;
Alone, for so he wills; no Trojan near,
Except, to place the dead with decent care,
Some aged herald, who with gentle hand
May the slow mules and funeral car command.
Nor shalt thou death, nor shall thou danger dread:
Safe through the foe by his protection led:
Thee Hermes to Pelides shall convey,
Guard of thy life, and partner of thy way.
Fierce as he is, Achilles' self shall spare
Thy age, nor touch one venerable hair;
Some thought there must be in a soul so brave,
Some sense of duty, some desire to save."

She spoke, and vanish'd. Priam bids prepare
His gentle mules and harness to the car;
There, for the gifts, a polish'd casket lay:
His pious sons the king's command obey.
Then pass'd the monarch to his bridal-room,
Where cedar-beams the lofty roofs perfume,
And where the treasures of his empire lay;
Then call'd his queen, and thus began to say:

"Unhappy consort of a king distress'd!
Partake the troubles of thy husband's breast:
I saw descend the messenger of Jove,
Who bids me try Achilles' mind to move;
Forsake these ramparts, and with gifts obtain
The corse of Hector, at yon navy slain.
Tell me thy thought: my heart impels to go
Through hostile camps, and bears me to the foe."

The hoary monarch thus. Her piercing cries
Sad Hecuba renews, and then replies:
"Ah! whither wanders thy distemper'd mind?
And where the prudence now that awed mankind?
Through Phrygia once and foreign regions known;
Now all confused, distracted, overthrown!
Singly to pass through hosts of foes! to face
(O heart of steel!) the murderer of thy race!
To view that deathful eye, and wander o'er
Those hands yet red with Hector's noble gore!
Alas! my lord! he knows not how to spare.
And what his mercy, thy slain sons declare;
So brave! so many fallen! To claim his rage
Vain were thy dignity, and vain thy age.
No--pent in this sad palace, let us give
To grief the wretched days we have to live.
Still, still for Hector let our sorrows flow,
Born to his own, and to his parents' woe!
Doom'd from the hour his luckless life begun,
To dogs, to vultures, and to Peleus' son!
Oh! in his dearest blood might I allay
My rage, and these barbarities repay!
For ah! could Hector merit thus, whose breath
Expired not meanly, in unactive death?
He poured his latest blood in manly fight,
And fell a hero in his country's right."

"Seek not to stay me, nor my soul affright
With words of omen, like a bird of night,
(Replied unmoved the venerable man;)
'Tis heaven commands me, and you urge in vain.
Had any mortal voice the injunction laid,
Nor augur, priest, nor seer, had been obey'd.
A present goddess brought the high command,
I saw, I heard her, and the word shall stand.
I go, ye gods! obedient to your call:
If in yon camp your powers have doom'd my fall,
Content--By the same hand let me expire!
Add to the slaughter'd son the wretched sire!
One cold embrace at least may be allow'd,
And my last tears flow mingled with his blood!"

From forth his open'd stores, this said, he drew
Twelve costly carpets of refulgent hue,
As many vests, as many mantles told,
And twelve fair veils, and garments stiff with gold,
Two tripods next, and twice two chargers shine,
With ten pure talents from the richest mine;
And last a large well-labour'd bowl had place,
(The pledge of treaties once with friendly Thrace:)
Seem'd all too mean the stores he could employ,
For one last look to buy him back to Troy!

Lo! the sad father, frantic with his pain,
Around him furious drives his menial train:
In vain each slave with duteous care attends,
Each office hurts him, and each face offends.
"What make ye here, officious crowds! (he cries).
Hence! nor obtrude your anguish on my eyes.
Have ye no griefs at home, to fix ye there:
Am I the only object of despair?
Am I become my people's common show,
Set up by Jove your spectacle of woe?
No, you must feel him too; yourselves must fall;
The same stern god to ruin gives you all:
Nor is great Hector lost by me alone;
Your sole defence, your guardian power is gone!
I see your blood the fields of Phrygia drown,
I see the ruins of your smoking town!
O send me, gods! ere that sad day shall come,
A willing ghost to Pluto's dreary dome!"

He said, and feebly drives his friends away:
The sorrowing friends his frantic rage obey.
Next on his sons his erring fury falls,
Polites, Paris, Agathon, he calls;
His threats Deiphobus and Dius hear,
Hippothous, Pammon, Helenes the seer,
And generous Antiphon: for yet these nine
Survived, sad relics of his numerous line.

"Inglorious sons of an unhappy sire!
Why did not all in Hector's cause expire?
Wretch that I am! my bravest offspring slain.
You, the disgrace of Priam's house, remain!
Mestor the brave, renown'd in ranks of war,
With Troilus, dreadful on his rushing car,
And last great Hector, more than man divine,
For sure he seem'd not of terrestrial line!
All those relentless Mars untimely slew,
And left me these, a soft and servile crew,
Whose days the feast and wanton dance employ,
Gluttons and flatterers, the contempt of Troy!
Why teach ye not my rapid wheels to run,
And speed my journey to redeem my son?"

The sons their father's wretched age revere,
Forgive his anger, and produce the car.
High on the seat the cabinet they bind:
The new-made car with solid beauty shined;
Box was the yoke, emboss'd with costly pains,
And hung with ringlets to receive the reins;
Nine cubits long, the traces swept the ground:
These to the chariot's polish'd pole they bound.
Then fix'd a ring the running reins to guide,
And close beneath the gather'd ends were tied.
Next with the gifts (the price of Hector slain)
The sad attendants load the groaning wain:
Last to the yoke the well-matched mules they bring,
(The gift of Mysia to the Trojan king.)
But the fair horses, long his darling care,
Himself received, and harness'd to his car:
Grieved as he was, he not this task denied;
The hoary herald help'd him, at his side.
While careful these the gentle coursers join'd,
Sad Hecuba approach'd with anxious mind;
A golden bowl that foam'd with fragrant wine,
(Libation destined to the power divine,)
Held in her right, before the steed she stands,
And thus consigns it to the monarch's hands:

"Take this, and pour to Jove; that safe from harms
His grace restore thee to our roof and arms.
Since victor of thy fears, and slighting mine,
Heaven, or thy soul, inspires this bold design;
Pray to that god, who high on Ida's brow
Surveys thy desolated realms below,
His winged messenger to send from high,
And lead thy way with heavenly augury:
Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race
Tower on the right of yon ethereal space.
That sign beheld, and strengthen'd from above,
Boldly pursue the journey mark'd by Jove:
But if the god his augury denies,
Suppress thy impulse, nor reject advice."

"'Tis just (said Priam) to the sire above
To raise our hands; for who so good as Jove?"
He spoke, and bade the attendant handmaid bring
The purest water of the living spring:
(Her ready hands the ewer and bason held:)
Then took the golden cup his queen had fill'd;
On the mid pavement pours the rosy wine,
Uplifts his eyes, and calls the power divine:

"O first and greatest! heaven's imperial lord!
On lofty Ida's holy hill adored!
To stern Achilles now direct my ways,
And teach him mercy when a father prays.
If such thy will, despatch from yonder sky
Thy sacred bird, celestial augury!
Let the strong sovereign of the plumy race
Tower on the right of yon ethereal space;
So shall thy suppliant, strengthen'd from above,
Fearless pursue the journey mark'd by Jove."

Jove heard his prayer, and from the throne on high,
Despatch'd his bird, celestial augury!
The swift-wing'd chaser of the feather'd game,
And known to gods by Percnos' lofty name.
Wide as appears some palace-gate display'd.
So broad, his pinions stretch'd their ample shade,
As stooping dexter with resounding wings
The imperial bird descends in airy rings.
A dawn of joy in every face appears:
The mourning matron dries her timorous tears:
Swift on his car the impatient monarch sprung;
The brazen portal in his passage rung;
The mules preceding draw the loaded wain,
Charged with the gifts: Idaeus holds the rein:
The king himself his gentle steeds controls,
And through surrounding friends the chariot rolls.
On his slow wheels the following people wait,
Mourn at each step, and give him up to fate;
With hands uplifted eye him as he pass'd,
And gaze upon him as they gazed their last.
Now forward fares the father on his way,
Through the lone fields, and back to Ilion they.
Great Jove beheld him as he cross'd the plain,
And felt the woes of miserable man.
Then thus to Hermes: "Thou whose constant cares
Still succour mortals, and attend their prayers;
Behold an object to thy charge consign'd:
If ever pity touch'd thee for mankind,
Go, guard the sire: the observing foe prevent,
And safe conduct him to Achilles' tent."

The god obeys, his golden pinions binds,
And mounts incumbent on the wings of winds,
That high, through fields of air, his flight sustain,
O'er the wide earth, and o'er the boundless main;
Then grasps the wand that causes sleep to fly,
Or in soft slumbers seals the wakeful eye:
Thus arm'd, swift Hermes steers his airy way,
And stoops on Hellespont's resounding sea.
A beauteous youth, majestic and divine,
He seem'd; fair offspring of some princely line!
Now twilight veil'd the glaring face of day,
And clad the dusky fields in sober grey;
What time the herald and the hoary king
(Their chariots stopping at the silver spring,
That circling Ilus' ancient marble flows)
Allow'd their mules and steeds a short repose,
Through the dim shade the herald first espies
A man's approach, and thus to Priam cries:
"I mark some foe's advance: O king! beware;
This hard adventure claims thy utmost care!
For much I fear destruction hovers nigh:
Our state asks counsel; is it best to fly?
Or old and helpless, at his feet to fall,
Two wretched suppliants, and for mercy call?"

The afflicted monarch shiver'd with despair;
Pale grew his face, and upright stood his hair;
Sunk was his heart; his colour went and came;
A sudden trembling shook his aged frame:
When Hermes, greeting, touch'd his royal hand,
And, gentle, thus accosts with kind demand:

"Say whither, father! when each mortal sight
Is seal'd in sleep, thou wanderest through the night?
Why roam thy mules and steeds the plains along,
Through Grecian foes, so numerous and so strong?
What couldst thou hope, should these thy treasures view;
These, who with endless hate thy race pursue?
For what defence, alas! could'st thou provide;
Thyself not young, a weak old man thy guide?
Yet suffer not thy soul to sink with dread;
From me no harm shall touch thy reverend head;
From Greece I'll guard thee too; for in those lines
The living image of my father shines."

"Thy words, that speak benevolence of mind,
Are true, my son! (the godlike sire rejoin'd:)
Great are my hazards; but the gods survey
My steps, and send thee, guardian of my way.
Hail, and be bless'd! For scarce of mortal kind
Appear thy form, thy feature, and thy mind."

"Nor true are all thy words, nor erring wide;
(The sacred messenger of heaven replied;)
But say, convey'st thou through the lonely plains
What yet most precious of thy store remains,
To lodge in safety with some friendly hand:
Prepared, perchance, to leave thy native land?
Or fliest thou now?--What hopes can Troy retain,
Thy matchless son, her guard and glory, slain?"

The king, alarm'd: "Say what, and whence thou art
Who search the sorrows of a parent's heart,
And know so well how godlike Hector died?"
Thus Priam spoke, and Hermes thus replied:

"You tempt me, father, and with pity touch:
On this sad subject you inquire too much.
Oft have these eyes that godlike Hector view'd
In glorious fight, with Grecian blood embrued:
I saw him when, like Jove, his flames he toss'd
On thousand ships, and wither'd half a host:
I saw, but help'd not: stern Achilles' ire
Forbade assistance, and enjoy'd the fire.
For him I serve, of Myrmidonian race;
One ship convey'd us from our native place;
Polyctor is my sire, an honour'd name,
Old like thyself, and not unknown to fame;
Of seven his sons, by whom the lot was cast
To serve our prince, it fell on me, the last.
To watch this quarter, my adventure falls:
For with the morn the Greeks attack your walls;
Sleepless they sit, impatient to engage,
And scarce their rulers check their martial rage."

"If then thou art of stern Pelides' train,
(The mournful monarch thus rejoin'd again,)
Ah tell me truly, where, oh! where are laid
My son's dear relics? what befals him dead?
Have dogs dismember'd (on the naked plains),
Or yet unmangled rest, his cold remains?"

"O favour'd of the skies! (thus answered then
The power that mediates between god and men)
Nor dogs nor vultures have thy Hector rent,
But whole he lies, neglected in the tent:
This the twelfth evening since he rested there,
Untouch'd by worms, untainted by the air.
Still as Aurora's ruddy beam is spread,
Round his friend's tomb Achilles drags the dead:
Yet undisfigured, or in limb or face,
All fresh he lies, with every living grace,
Majestical in death! No stains are found
O'er all the corse, and closed is every wound,
Though many a wound they gave. Some heavenly care,
Some hand divine, preserves him ever fair:
Or all the host of heaven, to whom he led
A life so grateful, still regard him dead."

Thus spoke to Priam the celestial guide,
And joyful thus the royal sire replied:
"Blest is the man who pays the gods above
The constant tribute of respect and love!
Those who inhabit the Olympian bower
My son forgot not, in exalted power;
And heaven, that every virtue bears in mind,
Even to the ashes of the just is kind.
But thou, O generous youth! this goblet take,
A pledge of gratitude for Hector's sake;
And while the favouring gods our steps survey,
Safe to Pelides' tent conduct my way."

To whom the latent god: "O king, forbear
To tempt my youth, for apt is youth to err.
But can I, absent from my prince's sight,
Take gifts in secret, that must shun the light?
What from our master's interest thus we draw,
Is but a licensed theft that 'scapes the law.
Respecting him, my soul abjures the offence;
And as the crime, I dread the consequence.
Thee, far as Argos, pleased I could convey;
Guard of thy life, and partner of thy way:
On thee attend, thy safety to maintain,
O'er pathless forests, or the roaring main."

He said, then took the chariot at a bound,
And snatch'd the reins, and whirl'd the lash around:
Before the inspiring god that urged them on,
The coursers fly with spirit not their own.
And now they reach'd the naval walls, and found
The guards repasting, while the bowls go round;
On these the virtue of his wand he tries,
And pours deep slumber on their watchful eyes:
Then heaved the massy gates, removed the bars,
And o'er the trenches led the rolling cars.
Unseen, through all the hostile camp they went,
And now approach'd Pelides' lofty tent.
On firs the roof was raised, and cover'd o'er
With reeds collected from the marshy shore;
And, fenced with palisades, a hall of state,
(The work of soldiers,) where the hero sat.
Large was the door, whose well-compacted strength
A solid pine-tree barr'd of wondrous length:
Scarce three strong Greeks could lift its mighty weight,
But great Achilles singly closed the gate.
This Hermes (such the power of gods) set wide;
Then swift alighted the celestial guide,
And thus reveal'd--"Hear, prince! and understand
Thou ow'st thy guidance to no mortal hand:
Hermes I am, descended from above,
The king of arts, the messenger of Jove,
Farewell: to shun Achilles' sight I fly;
Uncommon are such favours of the sky,
Nor stand confess'd to frail mortality.
Now fearless enter, and prefer thy prayers;
Adjure him by his father's silver hairs,
His son, his mother! urge him to bestow
Whatever pity that stern heart can know."

Thus having said, he vanish'd from his eyes,
And in a moment shot into the skies:
The king, confirm'd from heaven, alighted there,
And left his aged herald on the car,
With solemn pace through various rooms he went,
And found Achilles in his inner tent:
There sat the hero: Alcimus the brave,
And great Automedon, attendance gave:
These served his person at the royal feast;
Around, at awful distance, stood the rest.

Unseen by these, the king his entry made:
And, prostrate now before Achilles laid,
Sudden (a venerable sight!) appears;
Embraced his knees, and bathed his hands in tears;
Those direful hands his kisses press'd, embrued
Even with the best, the dearest of his blood!

As when a wretch (who, conscious of his crime,
Pursued for murder, flies his native clime)
Just gains some frontier, breathless, pale, amazed,
All gaze, all wonder: thus Achilles gazed:
Thus stood the attendants stupid with surprise:
All mute, yet seem'd to question with their eyes:
Each look'd on other, none the silence broke,
Till thus at last the kingly suppliant spoke:

"Ah think, thou favour'd of the powers divine!
Think of thy father's age, and pity mine!
In me that father's reverend image trace,
Those silver hairs, that venerable face;
His trembling limbs, his helpless person, see!
In all my equal, but in misery!
Yet now, perhaps, some turn of human fate
Expels him helpless from his peaceful state;
Think, from some powerful foe thou seest him fly,
And beg protection with a feeble cry.
Yet still one comfort in his soul may rise;
He hears his son still lives to glad his eyes,
And, hearing, still may hope a better day
May send him thee, to chase that foe away.
No comfort to my griefs, no hopes remain,
The best, the bravest, of my sons are slain!
Yet what a race! ere Greece to Ilion came,
The pledge of many a loved and loving dame:
Nineteen one mother bore--Dead, all are dead!
How oft, alas! has wretched Priam bled!
Still one was left their loss to recompense;
His father's hope, his country's last defence.
Him too thy rage has slain! beneath thy steel,
Unhappy in his country's cause he fell!

"For him through hostile camps I bent my way,
For him thus prostrate at thy feet I lay;
Large gifts proportion'd to thy wrath I bear;
O hear the wretched, and the gods revere!

"Think of thy father, and this face behold!
See him in me, as helpless and as old!
Though not so wretched: there he yields to me,
The first of men in sovereign misery!
Thus forced to kneel, thus grovelling to embrace
The scourge and ruin of my realm and race;
Suppliant my children's murderer to implore,
And kiss those hands yet reeking with their gore!"

These words soft pity in the chief inspire,
Touch'd with the dear remembrance of his sire.
Then with his hand (as prostrate still he lay)
The old man's cheek he gently turn'd away.
Now each by turns indulged the gush of woe;
And now the mingled tides together flow:
This low on earth, that gently bending o'er;
A father one, and one a son deplore:
But great Achilles different passions rend,
And now his sire he mourns, and now his friend.
The infectious softness through the heroes ran;
One universal solemn shower began;
They bore as heroes, but they felt as man.

Satiate at length with unavailing woes,
From the high throne divine Achilles rose;
The reverend monarch by the hand he raised;
On his white beard and form majestic gazed,
Not unrelenting; then serene began
With words to soothe the miserable man:

"Alas, what weight of anguish hast thou known,
Unhappy prince! thus guardless and alone
Two pass through foes, and thus undaunted face
The man whose fury has destroy'd thy race!
Heaven sure has arm'd thee with a heart of steel,
A strength proportion'd to the woes you feel.
Rise, then: let reason mitigate your care:
To mourn avails not: man is born to bear.
Such is, alas! the gods' severe decree:
They, only they are blest, and only free.
Two urns by Jove's high throne have ever stood,
The source of evil one, and one of good;
From thence the cup of mortal man he fills,
Blessings to these, to those distributes ill;
To most he mingles both: the wretch decreed
To taste the bad unmix'd, is cursed indeed;
Pursued by wrongs, by meagre famine driven,
He wanders, outcast both of earth and heaven.
The happiest taste not happiness sincere;
But find the cordial draught is dash'd with care.
Who more than Peleus shone in wealth and power
What stars concurring bless'd his natal hour!
A realm, a goddess, to his wishes given;
Graced by the gods with all the gifts of heaven.
One evil yet o'ertakes his latest day:
No race succeeding to imperial sway;
An only son; and he, alas! ordain'd
To fall untimely in a foreign land.
See him, in Troy, the pious care decline
Of his weak age, to live the curse of thine!
Thou too, old man, hast happier days beheld;
In riches once, in children once excell'd;
Extended Phrygia own'd thy ample reign,
And all fair Lesbos' blissful seats contain,
And all wide Hellespont's unmeasured main.
But since the god his hand has pleased to turn,
And fill thy measure from his bitter urn,
What sees the sun, but hapless heroes' falls?
War, and the blood of men, surround thy walls!
What must be, must be. Bear thy lot, nor shed
These unavailing sorrows o'er the dead;
Thou canst not call him from the Stygian shore,
But thou, alas! may'st live to suffer more!"

To whom the king: "O favour'd of the skies!
Here let me grow to earth! since Hector lies
On the bare beach deprived of obsequies.
O give me Hector! to my eyes restore
His corse, and take the gifts: I ask no more.
Thou, as thou may'st, these boundless stores enjoy;
Safe may'st thou sail, and turn thy wrath from Troy;
So shall thy pity and forbearance give
A weak old man to see the light and live!"

"Move me no more, (Achilles thus replies,
While kindling anger sparkled in his eyes,)
Nor seek by tears my steady soul to bend:
To yield thy Hector I myself intend:
For know, from Jove my goddess-mother came,
(Old Ocean's daughter, silver-footed dame,)
Nor comest thou but by heaven; nor comest alone,
Some god impels with courage not thy own:
No human hand the weighty gates unbarr'd,
Nor could the boldest of our youth have dared
To pass our outworks, or elude the guard.
Cease; lest, neglectful of high Jove's command,
I show thee, king! thou tread'st on hostile land;
Release my knees, thy suppliant arts give o'er,
And shake the purpose of my soul no more."

The sire obey'd him, trembling and o'eraw'd.
Achilles, like a lion, rush'd abroad:
Automedon and Alcimus attend,
(Whom most he honour'd, since he lost his friend,)
These to unyoke the mules and horses went,
And led the hoary herald to the tent;
Next, heap'd on high, the numerous presents bear,
(Great Hector's ransom,) from the polish'd car.
Two splendid mantles, and a carpet spread,
They leave: to cover and enwrap the dead.
Then call the handmaids, with assistant toil
To wash the body and anoint with oil,
Apart from Priam: lest the unhappy sire,
Provoked to passion, once more rouse to ire
The stern Pelides; and nor sacred age,
Nor Jove's command, should check the rising rage.
This done, the garments o'er the corse they spread;
Achilles lifts it to the funeral bed:
Then, while the body on the car they laid,
He groans, and calls on loved Patroclus' shade:

"If, in that gloom which never light must know,
The deeds of mortals touch the ghosts below,
O friend! forgive me, that I thus fulfil
(Restoring Hector) heaven's unquestion'd will.
The gifts the father gave, be ever thine,
To grace thy manes, and adorn thy shrine."

He said, and, entering, took his seat of state;
Where full before him reverend Priam sate;
To whom, composed, the godlike chief begun:
"Lo! to thy prayer restored, thy breathless son;
Extended on the funeral couch he lies;
And soon as morning paints the eastern skies,
The sight is granted to thy longing eyes:
But now the peaceful hours of sacred night
Demand reflection, and to rest invite:
Nor thou, O father! thus consumed with woe,
The common cares that nourish life forego.
Not thus did Niobe, of form divine,
A parent once, whose sorrows equall'd thine:
Six youthful sons, as many blooming maids,
In one sad day beheld the Stygian shades;
Those by Apollo's silver bow were slain,
These, Cynthia's arrows stretch'd upon the plain:
So was her pride chastised by wrath divine,
Who match'd her own with bright Latona's line;
But two the goddess, twelve the queen enjoy'd;
Those boasted twelve, the avenging two destroy'd.
Steep'd in their blood, and in the dust outspread,
Nine days, neglected, lay exposed the dead;
None by to weep them, to inhume them none;
(For Jove had turn'd the nation all to stone.)
The gods themselves, at length relenting gave
The unhappy race the honours of a grave.
Herself a rock (for such was heaven's high will)
Through deserts wild now pours a weeping rill;
Where round the bed whence Achelous springs,
The watery fairies dance in mazy rings;
There high on Sipylus's shaggy brow,
She stands, her own sad monument of woe;
The rock for ever lasts, the tears for ever flow.

"Such griefs, O king! have other parents known;
Remember theirs, and mitigate thy own.
The care of heaven thy Hector has appear'd,
Nor shall he lie unwept, and uninterr'd;
Soon may thy aged cheeks in tears be drown'd,
And all the eyes of Ilion stream around."

He said, and, rising, chose the victim ewe
With silver fleece, which his attendants slew.
The limbs they sever from the reeking hide,
With skill prepare them, and in parts divide:
Each on the coals the separate morsels lays,
And, hasty, snatches from the rising blaze.
With bread the glittering canisters they load,
Which round the board Automedon bestow'd.
The chief himself to each his portion placed,
And each indulging shared in sweet repast.
When now the rage of hunger was repress'd,
The wondering hero eyes his royal guest:
No less the royal guest the hero eyes,
His godlike aspect and majestic size;
Here, youthful grace and noble fire engage;
And there, the mild benevolence of age.
Thus gazing long, the silence neither broke,
(A solemn scene!) at length the father spoke:

"Permit me now, beloved of Jove! to steep
My careful temples in the dew of sleep:
For, since the day that number'd with the dead
My hapless son, the dust has been my bed;
Soft sleep a stranger to my weeping eyes;
My only food, my sorrows and my sighs!
Till now, encouraged by the grace you give,
I share thy banquet, and consent to live."

With that, Achilles bade prepare the bed,
With purple soft and shaggy carpets spread;
Forth, by the flaming lights, they bend their way,
And place the couches, and the coverings lay.
Then he: "Now, father, sleep, but sleep not here;
Consult thy safety, and forgive my fear,
Lest any Argive, at this hour awake,
To ask our counsel, or our orders take,
Approaching sudden to our open'd tent,
Perchance behold thee, and our grace prevent.
Should such report thy honour'd person here,
The king of men the ransom might defer;
But say with speed, if aught of thy desire
Remains unask'd; what time the rites require
To inter thy Hector? For, so long we stay
Our slaughtering arm, and bid the hosts obey."

"If then thy will permit (the monarch said)
To finish all due honours to the dead,
This of thy grace accord: to thee are known
The fears of Ilion, closed within her town;
And at what distance from our walls aspire
The hills of Ide, and forests for the fire.
Nine days to vent our sorrows I request,
The tenth shall see the funeral and the feast;
The next, to raise his monument be given;
The twelfth we war, if war be doom'd by heaven!"

"This thy request (replied the chief) enjoy:
Till then our arms suspend the fall of Troy."

Then gave his hand at parting, to prevent
The old man's fears, and turn'd within the tent;
Where fair Briseis, bright in blooming charms,
Expects her hero with desiring arms.
But in the porch the king and herald rest;
Sad dreams of care yet wandering in their breast.
Now gods and men the gifts of sleep partake;
Industrious Hermes only was awake,
The king's return revolving in his mind,
To pass the ramparts, and the watch to blind.
The power descending hover'd o'er his head:
"And sleep'st thou, father! (thus the vision said:)
Now dost thou sleep, when Hector is restored?
Nor fear the Grecian foes, or Grecian lord?
Thy presence here should stern Atrides see,
Thy still surviving sons may sue for thee;
May offer all thy treasures yet contain,
To spare thy age; and offer all in vain."

Waked with the word the trembling sire arose,
And raised his friend: the god before him goes:
He joins the mules, directs them with his hand,
And moves in silence through the hostile land.
When now to Xanthus' yellow stream they drove,
(Xanthus, immortal progeny of Jove,)
The winged deity forsook their view,
And in a moment to Olympus flew.
Now shed Aurora round her saffron ray,
Sprang through the gates of light, and gave the day:
Charged with the mournful load, to Ilion go
The sage and king, majestically slow.
Cassandra first beholds, from Ilion's spire,
The sad procession of her hoary sire;
Then, as the pensive pomp advanced more near,
(Her breathless brother stretched upon the bier,)
A shower of tears o'erflows her beauteous eyes,
Alarming thus all Ilion with her cries:

"Turn here your steps, and here your eyes employ,
Ye wretched daughters, and ye sons of Troy!
If e'er ye rush'd in crowds, with vast delight,
To hail your hero glorious from the fight,
Now meet him dead, and let your sorrows flow;
Your common triumph, and your common woe."

In thronging crowds they issue to the plains;
Nor man nor woman in the walls remains;
In every face the self-same grief is shown;
And Troy sends forth one universal groan.
At Scaea's gates they meet the mourning wain,
Hang on the wheels, and grovel round the slain.
The wife and mother, frantic with despair,
Kiss his pale cheek, and rend their scatter'd hair:
Thus wildly wailing, at the gates they lay;
And there had sigh'd and sorrow'd out the day;
But godlike Priam from the chariot rose:
"Forbear (he cried) this violence of woes;
First to the palace let the car proceed,
Then pour your boundless sorrows o'er the dead."

The waves of people at his word divide,
Slow rolls the chariot through the following tide;
Even to the palace the sad pomp they wait:
They weep, and place him on the bed of state.
A melancholy choir attend around,
With plaintive sighs, and music's solemn sound:
Alternately they sing, alternate flow
The obedient tears, melodious in their woe.
While deeper sorrows groan from each full heart,
And nature speaks at every pause of art.

First to the corse the weeping consort flew;
Around his neck her milk-white arms she threw,
"And oh, my Hector! Oh, my lord! (she cries)
Snatch'd in thy bloom from these desiring eyes!
Thou to the dismal realms for ever gone!
And I abandon'd, desolate, alone!
An only son, once comfort of our pains,
Sad product now of hapless love, remains!
Never to manly age that son shall rise,
Or with increasing graces glad my eyes:
For Ilion now (her great defender slain)
Shall sink a smoking ruin on the plain.
Who now protects her wives with guardian care?
Who saves her infants from the rage of war?
Now hostile fleets must waft those infants o'er
(Those wives must wait them) to a foreign shore:
Thou too, my son, to barbarous climes shall go,
The sad companion of thy mother's woe;
Driven hence a slave before the victor's sword
Condemn'd to toil for some inhuman lord:
Or else some Greek whose father press'd the plain,
Or son, or brother, by great Hector slain,
In Hector's blood his vengeance shall enjoy,
And hurl thee headlong from the towers of Troy.
For thy stern father never spared a foe:
Thence all these tears, and all this scene of woe!
Thence many evils his sad parents bore,
His parents many, but his consort more.
Why gav'st thou not to me thy dying hand?
And why received not I thy last command?
Some word thou would'st have spoke, which, sadly dear,
My soul might keep, or utter with a tear;
Which never, never could be lost in air,
Fix'd in my heart, and oft repeated there!"

Thus to her weeping maids she makes her moan,
Her weeping handmaids echo groan for groan.

The mournful mother next sustains her part:
"O thou, the best, the dearest to my heart!
Of all my race thou most by heaven approved,
And by the immortals even in death beloved!
While all my other sons in barbarous bands
Achilles bound, and sold to foreign lands,
This felt no chains, but went a glorious ghost,
Free, and a hero, to the Stygian coast.
Sentenced, 'tis true, by his inhuman doom,
Thy noble corse was dragg'd around the tomb;
(The tomb of him thy warlike arm had slain;)
Ungenerous insult, impotent and vain!
Yet glow'st thou fresh with every living grace;
No mark of pain, or violence of face:
Rosy and fair! as Phoebus' silver bow
Dismiss'd thee gently to the shades below."

Thus spoke the dame, and melted into tears.
Sad Helen next in pomp of grief appears;
Fast from the shining sluices of her eyes
Fall the round crystal drops, while thus she cries.

"Ah, dearest friend! in whom the gods had join'd
Tne mildest manners with the bravest mind,
Now twice ten years (unhappy years) are o'er
Since Paris brought me to the Trojan shore,
(O had I perish'd, ere that form divine
Seduced this soft, this easy heart of mine!)
Yet was it ne'er my fate, from thee to find
A deed ungentle, or a word unkind.
When others cursed the authoress of their woe,
Thy pity check'd my sorrows in their flow.
If some proud brother eyed me with disdain,
Or scornful sister with her sweeping train,
Thy gentle accents soften'd all my pain.
For thee I mourn, and mourn myself in thee,
The wretched source of all this misery.
The fate I caused, for ever I bemoan;
Sad Helen has no friend, now thou art gone!
Through Troy's wide streets abandon'd shall I roam!
In Troy deserted, as abhorr'd at home!"

So spoke the fair, with sorrow-streaming eye.
Distressful beauty melts each stander-by.
On all around the infectious sorrow grows;
But Priam check'd the torrent as it rose:
"Perform, ye Trojans! what the rites require,
And fell the forests for a funeral pyre;
Twelve days, nor foes nor secret ambush dread;
Achilles grants these honours to the dead."

He spoke, and, at his word, the Trojan train
Their mules and oxen harness to the wain,
Pour through the gates, and fell'd from Ida's crown,
Roll back the gather'd forests to the town.
These toils continue nine succeeding days,
And high in air a sylvan structure raise.
But when the tenth fair morn began to shine,
Forth to the pile was borne the man divine,
And placed aloft; while all, with streaming eyes,
Beheld the flames and rolling smokes arise.
Soon as Aurora, daughter of the dawn,
With rosy lustre streak'd the dewy lawn,
Again the mournful crowds surround the pyre,
And quench with wine the yet remaining fire.
The snowy bones his friends and brothers place
(With tears collected) in a golden vase;
The golden vase in purple palls they roll'd,
Of softest texture, and inwrought with gold.
Last o'er the urn the sacred earth they spread,
And raised the tomb, memorial of the dead.
(Strong guards and spies, till all the rites were done,
Watch'd from the rising to the setting sun.)
All Troy then moves to Priam's court again,
A solemn, silent, melancholy train:
Assembled there, from pious toil they rest,
And sadly shared the last sepulchral feast.
Such honours Ilion to her hero paid,
And peaceful slept the mighty Hector's shade.
